Scale-Separated Conditioning for
Style-Encoder-Free Diffusion Stylization
Jingtao Zhang1⋆, Haorui Gao2⋆⋆, Youqing Liang2, and Zeming Liu3
1 College of Computing, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA, USA
jzhang957@gatech.edu
2 Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences, New York University, New York, NY,
USA
3 Department of Computer Science, Brown University, Providence, RI, USA
Abstract. Reference-based diffusion stylization requires separating tar-
get geometry from transferable appearance. Existing tuning-based meth-
ods often rely on aligned content-style-target triplets or auxiliary visual
encoders, which increases data cost and can transfer unintended scene
structure from the style reference. We propose SEFS (Style-Encoder-Free
Stylization), a style-encoder-free conditioning framework for diffusion
transformers. SEFS forms style tokens from stochastic low-resolution
crops of single training images. This crop bottleneck preserves local ap-
pearance statistics such as palette, stroke, texture, and material, while
reducing access to global layout cues. Target content is encoded by edge
and segmentation cues and fused with the noisy latent through parameter-
efficient trainable projections. We add style-to-denoising re-normalization
for token-statistic alignment and cross-block skip fusion for spatial detail.
SEFS trains on unpaired single images; the frozen diffusion VAE is used
only to place image conditions in the latent space. On artistic stylization
benchmarks, SEFS improves content consistency and leakage diagnostics
while retaining reference-style affinity, and ablations support the crop-
resolution, re-normalization, and skip-fusion choices. The code of SEFS
will be made publicly available.
Keywords: Reference-based stylization · Diffusion models · Style transfer
1
Introduction
Diffusion-based text-to-image models have become a common backbone for
visual generation, with rapid progress in latent diffusion and diffusion trans-
formers [21,19,8,5,4]. Their pretrained priors support many conditioning tasks,
including text prompts, spatial controls, identity references, inpainting or out-
painting, and image edits [30,29,22,1,31,2,14,23]. Reference-based stylization is
one such conditioning problem. Given a target content image and a style ref-
erence, the model must preserve the target geometry while transferring visual
⋆Equal contribution. Corresponding author.
⋆⋆Equal contribution.
arXiv:2608.19719v1  [cs.CV]  20 Aug 2026


2
J. Zhang et al.
appearance such as palette, material, atmosphere, stroke pattern, illumination,
and local texture. These attributes are not explicitly labeled in the reference: style
is entangled with the reference image’s own objects, layout, and scene semantics.
This makes stylized data collection, style representation, and evaluation difficult.
This entanglement leads to a common failure mode. If the reference repre-
sentation is too rich, the model may copy non-transferable structure from the
style image, causing content leakage. If it is too weak, the generated image
preserves geometry but misses the reference appearance. Existing approaches
occupy different points on this trade-off. Training-free methods manipulate inver-
sion trajectories or attention features from the reference [26,6,10,20,13], which
avoids additional training but can be slow when inversion is required, sensitive
to inversion quality, and dependent on layer-wise intervention. Adapter-based
methods introduce pretrained image encoders or prompt adapters [29,9], but the
extracted embeddings are not guaranteed to isolate style from semantics and
introduce additional parameters. Tuning-based methods can improve stylization,
yet often depend on curated content-style-target triplets or large-scale paired
construction [28], making the data pipeline expensive and limiting scalability.
SEFS uses a conditioning bottleneck rather than a stronger style encoder.
A style reference contains transferable appearance at local scales, whereas its
global spatial arrangement is usually non-transferable. We therefore construct
style tokens from stochastic low-resolution crops of individual images. Cropping
exposes local appearance statistics; resizing suppresses precise contours and global
layout; and training across many single images discourages an image-identity
shortcut. At inference time, the same style-token pathway is driven by an external
style reference, while content is supplied by structural controls from the target
image. This creates a same-image-to-cross-image generalization setting: training
learns the scale-separated roles from unpaired single images, whereas evaluation
tests fixed target-content and external-style-reference pairs.
We propose SEFS (Style-Encoder-Free Stylization), a style-encoder-free con-
ditioning framework for diffusion transformers. SEFS separates the conditioning
pathway by scale and role: edge maps and segmentation maps provide target-
content cues, while low-resolution style crops provide appearance tokens. These
conditions are fused into the diffusion transformer with parameter-efficient train-
able projections and LoRA adaptation. Style-to-denoising re-normalization aligns
the statistics of style tokens with the denoising token stream, and cross-block skip
fusion reuses shallow structural features in later transformer blocks. The frame-
work uses unpaired single images for training, avoids auxiliary style encoders,
and remains parameter-efficient.
Our contributions are summarized as follows:
i) We introduce SEFS, a style-encoder-free diffusion stylization framework
that learns from unpaired single images rather than aligned content-style-target
triplets. The method uses a scale-separated crop bottleneck to preserve local
appearance statistics while suppressing global reference structure.
ii) We design a parameter-efficient trainable conditioning architecture that
combines target edges, segmentation maps, and low-resolution style tokens inside


Scale-Separated Conditioning for Diffusion Stylization
3
CSGO
StyleShot 
SEFS
Fig. 1. Representative comparisons with CSGO [28], StyleShot [9], and SEFS. Existing
methods can drift from the target content or transfer reference-specific structure; scale-
separated conditioning helps SEFS preserve target layout while matching reference
appearance.
a diffusion transformer. Cross-block skip fusion improves content preservation by
carrying shallow structural information to later denoising stages.
iii) We introduce style-to-denoising re-normalization to stabilize heterogeneous
token fusion. This module improves the crop-token pathway in our ablations and
supports training using about 40k unpaired WikiArt images, without requiring
curated triplets or a separate style-encoder training set.
iv) We evaluate SEFS against recent diffusion stylization methods and conduct
focused ablations on content conditions, crop resolution, style-encoder usage,
re-normalization, and skip fusion. The results improve content scores and leakage
diagnostics while retaining reference-style affinity.
2
Related Work
2.1
Diffusion Models and Conditional Generation
Latent diffusion models [21,19] and diffusion transformers [18,8,5,4,32,24] provide
strong priors for controllable image synthesis. Typical conditioning methods
keep the generator largely fixed and add spatial adapters [30], image-prompt
adapters [29], or low-rank tuning [11]. This makes adaptation efficient but creates
a representation trade-off: conditions must guide generation without overriding
target content or leaking unwanted semantics. In stylization, spatial maps preserve
geometry but not appearance, whereas image embeddings can entangle style
with reference identity, objects, and layout. SEFS keeps the parameter-efficient
paradigm but replaces the auxiliary style encoder with a scale-separated image
pathway.


4
J. Zhang et al.
2.2
Reference-Based Stylization
Arbitrary reference-based stylization remains difficult because style may include
color, material, atmosphere, stroke statistics, and sometimes global structure.
Classical neural style transfer separates content and style through feature statis-
tics, as in AdaIN-style normalization [12], while transformer feed-forward methods
improve perceptual quality and content preservation [7]. Diffusion methods ex-
ploit stronger generative priors, but still need a style pathway that transfers
appearance without copying reference layout.
Recent diffusion stylization methods are commonly training-free, adapter-
based, or tuning-based. Training-free approaches manipulate inversion trajectories,
attention features, reference modulation, or sampling startpoints [26,6,10,20,13].
They avoid task-specific training but can be sensitive to inversion quality, layer
choices, and attention reuse. Adapter-based methods use image-conditioned
pathways or pretrained visual encoders [29,9], which capture rich appearance but
may retain object category, layout, or reference identity. Tuning-based methods
such as CSGO [28] improve stylization end-to-end, often with curated triplets or
large construction pipelines.
SEFS is complementary to these directions. Instead of extracting a full-
resolution style embedding with a pretrained encoder, it forms style tokens
from stochastic low-resolution crops. This bottleneck preserves local transferable
appearance while suppressing global reference geometry; combined with target
structural cues and token re-normalization, it yields a diffusion-transformer
stylization framework trained without triplet supervision or an auxiliary visual
style encoder.
3
The proposed SEFS
3.1
Preliminaries
Flow Matching. Let p0 and p1 denote the source and data distributions on
Rn. An ODE-based generative model transports a sample x0 ∼p0 to x1 ∼p1 by
integrating a time-dependent vector field:
dxt
dt = fθ(xt, t),
t ∈[0, 1].
(1)
The learned vector field fθ : Rn × [0, 1] →Rn defines the trajectory followed
during generation.
Rectified Flow. Rectified Flow [16] trains the vector field on straight paths
between a data sample and Gaussian noise. We use an equivalent reverse-time
parameterization of the SD3 latent-space path [8], where t = 0 corresponds to
noise and t = 1 corresponds to the data latent:
zt = (1 −t)ϵ + tz0,
ϵ ∼N(0, I),
(2)
and minimize
LRF = Et,ϵ
h
λt ∥fθ(zt, t) −(z0 −ϵ)∥2
2
i
,
(3)
where λt is the timestep-dependent loss weight.


Scale-Separated Conditioning for Diffusion Stylization
5
Resize
Random crop
SAM
Content Part
Style Part
VAE
Encoder
Latent + Noise
Canny
Canny Latent
SAM Latent
VAE
Encoder
Style Latent
Block 0
Token-wise 
Cat
Fused Latent
Noisy Latent
Style Latent
Fused Latent
Divide
Divide
𝜎!, 𝜇!
…
Remain Blocks
Noisy Distribution
Style Distribution
𝜎", 𝜇"
Channel-wise Cat
LoRA
: Freeze
: Tuned
Fused Latent 𝑧: 𝑧∈𝑅!"!# ∗$
Fig. 2. Framework of the proposed SEFS. The target image provides structural content
conditions through Canny edges and SAM [15] segmentation, while the style pathway
receives stochastic low-resolution crops that expose local appearance statistics and
suppress global layout. Style tokens are concatenated with the denoising tokens and
re-normalized using the denoising-token statistics (µd, vd) and style-token statistics
(µs, vs). The right part illustrates LoRA fine-tuning and cross-block skip fusion.
Raw Image
Canny
SAM
Style
Raw Image
Canny
SAM
Style
Fig. 3. Training inputs of SEFS. Canny edges preserve fine structural boundaries,
SAM masks preserve coarse region layout, and low-resolution style crops retain local
appearance while reducing access to global reference geometry.
3.2
The proposed SEFS
We first describe how SEFS constructs content and style conditions from single
images, then present the token projection, re-normalization, cross-block skip
fusion, and training objective.
Condition Generation. Given a training image x, SEFS constructs a
pseudo content-style training instance without requiring an external stylized
target. For content, we use two complementary structural views. Edge maps
such as Canny [3] and HED [27] are commonly used to provide high-frequency
boundaries and local contours; we instantiate this view with Canny edges. SAM
segmentation masks [15] provide region-level organization that is not captured by


6
J. Zhang et al.
sparse edges alone, such as consistent regions over buildings, sky, or mountains.
For style, we apply stochastic cropping to x and resize the crop to a low resolu-
tion. This operation preserves local appearance statistics such as color palette,
texture, material, and stroke pattern, but removes much of the precise contour
and global layout information that would otherwise encourage content leakage.
During inference, the cropped training view is replaced by the user-provided style
reference, processed through the same low-resolution style pathway.
Implementation details. During training, RandomCropResize samples a crop
with ratio (0.1 ∼0.5) from the training image and resizes it to 64 × 64 to form
the style view. During inference, we use a deterministic single-view protocol: the
full style reference is resized to the same 64 × 64 style-token resolution rather
than sampled repeatedly. Canny maps and SAM outputs are rendered as three-
channel images before VAE encoding, matching the input interface of the copied
SD3 patch-embedding branch. Text-conditioning settings are kept fixed across
training and evaluation so that differences primarily reflect the image-conditioning
pathways. Although training constructs pseudo instances from a single image, the
content and style signals are deliberately separated by role and scale: structural
maps provide geometry, while the low-resolution style view provides appearance
statistics with limited access to global layout. The cross-image evaluations in
Fig. 4 and Table 2 therefore test whether this bottleneck transfers to arbitrary
content-style pairs rather than only reconstructing the training image.
Condition projection. Let m ∈RH×W ×3 and c ∈RH×W ×3 denote the
SAM segmentation map and Canny edge map, respectively. Let s ∈RH1×W1×3
denote the low-resolution style view, where H1 < H and W1 < W. We use
pretrained SD3 [8] as the base model and form the noisy latent by
zt = (1 −t) · ϵ + t · z0
(4)
where z0 = Encode(x) and Encode(·) is the pretrained VAE encoder. We encode
the content and style conditions in the same latent space: mz = Encode(m),
cz = Encode(c), and sz = Encode(s). Thus, “style-encoder-free” means that
SEFS does not introduce an auxiliary CLIP/IP-Adapter-style visual encoder
for style extraction; all image conditions are encoded only through the frozen
diffusion VAE before entering the parameter-efficient trainable conditioning
branch. After patchification with patch size p and projection by the copied SD3
patch-embedding layer, the denoising latent, segmentation latent, and edge latent
are represented as sequences of length L and hidden dimension D, while the style
latent has length L1. We concatenate content-related tokens along the channel
dimension:
zcat = Concat(zt, mz, cz)
(5)
where zcat ∈RL×3D. A trainable projection Wcat ∈R3D×D maps the concate-
nated sequence back to the original hidden dimension. We initialize this projection


Scale-Separated Conditioning for Diffusion Stylization
7
to preserve the pretrained denoising stream at the beginning of fine-tuning:
Wcat =










1
0 · · · 0
0
1 · · · 0
· · · · · · · · · · · ·
0
0 · · · 1
0
0
0
0
· · · · · · · · · · · ·
0
0
0
0










,
z = zcatWcat
(6)
where Wcat is initialized by concatenating one D × D identity matrix and two
D × D zero matrices. The style tokens are then concatenated with the projected
denoising sequence along the token dimension, yielding z ∈R(L+L1)×D.
Re-normalization. The denoising tokens and style tokens originate from
different visual views and therefore have different activation statistics. Direct
token concatenation can make the style stream either dominate generation or be
ignored during early fine-tuning. To stabilize the fusion, after the first transformer
block we divide the sequence into the denoising part dz = z[0 : L] and the style
part sz = z[L : L + L1]. We then align the style-token statistics to the denoising-
token statistics:
˜sz =
√vd + η
√vs + η (sz −µs) + µd
(7)
where µs and vs are the channel-wise mean and variance of the style tokens,
µd and vd are the corresponding statistics of the denoising tokens, and η is
a small constant for numerical stability. The square roots convert variances
into standard-deviation scales for feature-statistic matching. Similar to adaptive
modulation in diffusion transformers [18], we predict a residual scale and shift
from the re-normalized style tokens:
γs = ˜szWscale,
βs = ˜szWshift,
sz = ˜sz ⊙(1 + γs) + βs
(8)
where Wscale ∈RD×D and Wshift ∈RD×D are trainable parameters.
Skip-Connection across blocks. Transformer blocks at shallow depths
preserve fine structural details, while deeper blocks tend to carry more semantic
and global information. To improve content preservation, we introduce cross-
block skip fusion in the latter half of the transformer. Let z(i) denote the output
sequence of block i in a model with N blocks. For later blocks, we concatenate
the current sequence with its paired shallow feature along the channel dimension
and project it back to D dimensions:
W(i)
skip =










1
0 · · · 0
0
1 · · · 0
· · · · · · · · · · · ·
0
0 · · · 1
0
0
0
0
· · · · · · · · · · · ·
0
0
0
0










,
z(i) = z(i)W(i)
skip
(9)


8
J. Zhang et al.
The skip projection is initialized to pass through the current block output and
gradually learn how much shallow structural information to reuse. The resulting
sequence z(i) ∈R(L+L1)×D is fed into the next block.
Objective function. The training objective follows the SD3 rectified-flow
loss with additional conditions:
LSEF S = λt · ∥f(zt, mz, cz, sz, t; θ) −(z0 −ϵ)∥2
2
(10)
where λt balances different timesteps.
Algorithm summary. We summarize the training pipeline in Algorithm 1
and the block-wise forward pass in Algorithm 2. Algorithm 1 shows how each un-
paired image is converted into structural content conditions and a low-resolution
style view, encoded into latent tokens, and optimized with the rectified-flow
objective. Algorithm 2 details the corresponding forward computation, including
content-token projection, style-token re-normalization, and cross-block skip fu-
sion. Here, ConCatDim and ConCatSeq denote concatenation over the channel
dimension and token dimension, respectively; at inference, the random crop is
replaced by the user-provided style reference while the rest of the conditioning
pipeline is unchanged.
Algorithm 1 Training pipeline of the proposed SEFS. RandomCropResize
denotes stochastic cropping followed by low-resolution resizing.
1: Input: Pretrained SD3 model fθ. Raw image x, text embeddings T. Pre-
trained SAM encoder SAM(·) and VAE encoder Encode(·). Canny detector
Canny(·), and Optimizer OPT(·).
2: Init: Θtrain including LoRA, projection, re-normalization, and skip-fusion
parameters
3: Data: s ←RandomCropResize(x)
4: Data: m ←SAM(x), c ←Canny(x)
5: Encode: mz, cz, sz, z0 ←Encode(m, c, s, x)
6: Diffusion: zt = (1 −t) · ϵ + t · z0, ϵ ∼N(0, I)
7: Forward: LSEF S = ∥fθ(zt, mz, cz, sz) −(z0 −ϵ)∥2
2
8: Backward: Θtrain = OPT(∂LSEF S/∂Θtrain)
9: Return: SD3 model with trained LoRA and trainable conditioning modules


Scale-Separated Conditioning for Diffusion Stylization
9
Algorithm 2 Block-wise forward of the proposed SEFS.
1: Input: i-th block with LoRA weights Block(i)(·), 0 ≤i ≤N −1, and N is
the number of blocks. Noisy image latent zt, style image latent sz, Canny
image latent cz, and SAM image latent mz. Extra learnable parameters Wcat
and W(i)
skip, N
2 ≤i ≤N −1. Shift and scale Wshift, Wscale.
2: Init: j ←0, skipList = []
3: Patchify: zt, sz, cz, mz = Patchify(zt, sz, cz, mz)
4: Content Fusion: z = ConCatDim(zt, cz, mz)Wcat
5: Style Fusion: z(0) = ConCatSeq(z, sz)
6: for j ≤N −1 do
7:
if j == 0 then
8:
Store: skipList.append(z(j))
9:
Forward: z(j+1) = Block(j)(z(j))
10:
Divide: dz, sz ←DivideSeq(z(j+1))
11:
Statistics: µd, vd ←Stats(dz)
12:
Statistics: µs, vs ←Stats(sz)
13:
Standardization: sz ←sz−µs
√vs+η, η = 10−5
14:
Re-Normalization: ˜sz ←sz ⊙√vd + η + µd
15:
Scale/Shift: as ←1 + ˜szWscale
16:
Scale/Shift: bs ←˜szWshift
17:
Re-Scale: sz ←˜sz ⊙as + bs
18:
Style-Fusion: z(j+1) ←CatSeq(dz, sz)
19:
else if j ≤(N −1)/2 then
20:
Store: skipList.append(z(j))
21:
Forward: z(j+1) = Block(j)(z(j))
22:
else
23:
Skip: z(j) = CatDim(z(j), skipList[N −1 −j])
24:
Fusion: z(j) ←z(j)W(j)
skip
25:
Forward: z(j+1) = Block(j)(z(j))
26:
end if
27:
j = j + 1
28: end for
29: return z(N)
Inference pipeline. Given a target content image r and a style reference
image s, we compute the Canny edge map c and SAM segmentation map m from
r. The style reference is passed through the same low-resolution style pathway
used during training. We then encode m, c, and s into latent conditions zm, zc,
and zs, and denoise a randomly initialized latent conditioned on all three signals.
4
Experimental Results
Experimental setup. We use SD3-Medium as the base generator and train
only LoRA layers, content/style projections, re-normalization scale/shift, and


10
J. Zhang et al.
cross-block skip projections. A copied SD3 patch-embedding layer encodes sz, cz,
and mz; the original branch remains frozen.
Training uses WikiArt [25], AdamW [17], 30k steps, learning rate 2 × 10−5,
weight decay 0.03, batch size 32, and 8 A100 GPUs. Evaluation protocol.
The main comparison uses 1,000 fixed cross-image content-style pairs against
StyleShot [9] and CSGO [28]. Canny/SAM are computed only from the target
content image; style references enter through each method’s style-conditioning
input. All methods use official checkpoints or recommended preprocessing, gen-
erate 512 × 512 images with 30 steps, and share prompts, seeds, and sampler
settings. We use LoRA rank 16, SAM ViT-H masks, and Canny thresholds
100/200. Content DINO and CLIP-I measure target consistency; Style Ref. Sim.
is CLIP image-image similarity to the reference; Leakage is a DINO diagnostic
between edge-rendered outputs and style references, where lower is better; FID is
computed against held-out WikiArt style-domain images. Human preference is the
primary aggregate signal, and automatic metrics are diagnostics. Pseudo-triplet
ablations in Tables 1 and 4 are used only for mechanism analysis.
Table 1. Content-condition and skip-fusion ablation on WikiArt. All variants use 30k
steps, batch size 32, and learning rate 2 × 10−5.
Skip-connection SAM Canny
IS
FID
CLIP-I
!
!
!
9.1788 48.7677 0.9063
%
!
!
9.1304
53.1521
0.8813
!
%
!
9.1543
49.3103
0.8983
!
!
%
9.0941
59.1620
0.8294
4.1
Main Comparisons
Fig. 4 compares SEFS with CSGO [28] and StyleShot [9]. Across diverse pairs,
SEFS preserves target structure while transferring palette, texture, and stroke
statistics. The references contain non-transferable foreground figures, village
layouts, and line-art contours; baselines more often inherit these structures or
distort target geometry.
Table 2 reports the main comparison. Standard baselines use their released
pipelines. To isolate the content-control confound, StyleShot + Struct. Ctrl. keeps
the StyleShot style encoder and injection pathway, adds the same target-derived
Canny/SAM branch as SEFS, and trains only the added structural projection
and LoRA layers with the same data, rank, and step budget. It does not use the
SEFS low-resolution style-token pathway or re-normalization.


Scale-Separated Conditioning for Diffusion Stylization
11
CSGO
Style
SEFS
Content
StyleShot
CSGO
SEFS
Content
StyleShot
Fig. 4. Qualitative comparisons. SEFS better preserves target layout while transferring
reference appearance; baselines either weaken style transfer or introduce reference-
induced content drift.
Table 2. Main comparison. StyleShot + Struct. Ctrl. gives StyleShot the same target-
derived Canny/SAM controls as SEFS. Time is per image on A100. Lower Leakage/FID
and higher content/style scores are better.
Method
Content DINO Content CLIP-I Style Ref. Sim. Leakage
FID
Time
StyleShot
0.8017
0.8684
0.7462
0.4871 56.8421 4.8s
StyleShot + Struct. Ctrl.
0.8918
0.8971
0.7785
0.4472 51.9248 7.2s
CSGO
0.8098
0.8566
0.7397
0.4944 60.6377 6.3s
SEFS
0.9040
0.9026
0.7835
0.3931 49.5724 6.1s
The matched-control baseline narrows the content gap, confirming the value
of structural conditions, but still has higher Leakage and worse FID despite
similar content and Style Ref. Sim. scores. Thus, SEFS’s gain is not explained
by Canny/SAM alone; under matched structure control, the low-resolution style
bottleneck better suppresses non-transferable reference layout.
Leakage validation. We annotate 100 hard pairs with non-transferable
objects or layouts. The DINO edge-rendering score correlates with human leakage
ratings with Spearman ρ = 0.62, while Style Ref. Sim. is weaker (ρ = 0.27),
supporting Leakage as an auxiliary diagnostic. Efficiency. SEFS uses no auxiliary
learned visual style encoder; image conditions pass through the frozen VAE, and
online structural preprocessing is counted in end-to-end latency. It adds 42.7M
trainable parameters, takes 3.9s model-only time on A100, and takes 6.1s end-
to-end with online Canny/SAM. Human preference. In blind forced-choice
comparisons, 42 participants judged six content-style pairs per comparison,
yielding 252 judgments for each method pair. Each question showed the same
content image, style reference, and two anonymized outputs in random order.


12
J. Zhang et al.
Under the joint criterion of content preservation and style fidelity, participants
preferred SEFS over StyleShot in 64.3% of comparisons (95% Wilson CI: 58.2–
69.9%), over CSGO in 72.2% (95% Wilson CI: 66.4–77.4%), and over StyleShot
+ Struct. Ctrl. in 62.7% (95% Wilson CI: 56.6–68.4%).
Table 3 gives cross-image mechanism controls. Removing or shuffling style
tokens preserves content but reduces style-reference similarity, showing that the
style pathway carries transferable appearance. SEFS w/ Style Encoder keeps the
same SD3 backbone, content branch, LoRA rank, data, and budget, but replaces
low-resolution VAE style tokens with a frozen CLIP visual style encoder and
trainable projection.
Table 3. Cross-image mechanism controls on the same 1,000 content-style pairs.
Variant
Content DINO Style Ref. Sim. Leakage
FID
Full SEFS
0.9040
0.7835
0.3931 49.5724
SEFS w/ Style Encoder
0.8924
0.7946
0.4478 52.3861
w/o style tokens
0.9132
0.7048
0.3619 55.2846
shuffled style
0.9015
0.7162
0.3698 53.9173
w/o re-normalization
0.8618
0.7447
0.4326 58.6035
high-res style tokens
0.8654
0.7779
0.4612 55.9184
The architecture-matched control reaches slightly higher Style Ref. Sim. than
SEFS, but also increases Leakage and FID, supporting the trade-off between
reference affinity and reference-layout leakage.
4.2
Ablation Studies
Content Consistency. We sample 1,000 WikiArt test images and construct
pseudo triplets with SAM, Canny [3], and a 64 × 64 random style crop, isolating
content conditioning because Canny and SAM encode structure rather than
appearance. For Canny-only or SAM-only variants, Wcat ∈R2D×D matches the
input dimension.
Table 1 shows that the full model performs best. Removing Canny causes the
largest FID and CLIP-I degradation, highlighting edge-level geometry; removing
SAM has a smaller but consistent effect on coarse layout. Skip fusion further
improves FID and CLIP-I.
Style Consistency. We analyze re-normalization and crop resolution with
10k-step variants. For the resolution ablation, the style-view resolution is varied
during training. At evaluation time, all style views are first downsampled to 64×64
and then resized to the corresponding training resolution, so the comparison
tests the learned resolution-specific pathway rather than giving higher-resolution
variants extra reference information. The encoder variant replaces crop tokens
with a pretrained CLIP visual encoder and trainable projection.


Scale-Separated Conditioning for Diffusion Stylization
13
Table 4. Style-token ablation on WikiArt. “Style Res” is the style-view resolution;
“Style Enc” replaces crop tokens with a pretrained CLIP visual encoder.
Re-Normalization Style Res Style Enc
IS
FID
CLIP-I
!
64 × 64
%
9.4697 54.1585 0.8821
%
64 × 64
%
9.0913
66.9413
0.8191
!
128 × 128
%
9.2169
56.9813
0.8535
!
256 × 256
%
9.3046
58.9413
0.8199
!
256 × 256
!
9.4039
57.0631
0.8517
Table 4 shows that removing re-normalization substantially degrades IS, FID,
and CLIP-I. The 64 × 64 setting performs best, suggesting that learning with a
stronger low-resolution bottleneck is beneficial; higher training resolutions weaken
this bottleneck and make the style pathway more prone to reference-structure
reliance. The CLIP-encoder variant does not outperform crop tokens, suggesting
that a stronger generic visual representation is not necessarily a better style
representation here.
5
Discussion
5.1
Methodology Comparisons
Relation to CSGO [28]. Both CSGO and SEFS are end-to-end tuning methods
for diffusion stylization. The main difference is the supervision and conditioning
design. CSGO relies on pre-collected content-style-target triplets, whereas SEFS
constructs pseudo training instances from unpaired single images. Architecturally,
CSGO uses an image encoder for style extraction and a ControlNet-style branch
for content control. SEFS instead uses low-resolution crop tokens for style,
structural maps for content, and parameter-efficient LoRA/projection layers [11],
reducing dependence on auxiliary encoders and triplet construction.
Relation to StyleShot [9]. StyleShot also aims to disentangle content
and style, but does so through dedicated pretrained encoders and a two-stage
training strategy. This design is practical for arbitrary style transfer, but the style
representation still relies on learned encoder capacity and can retain reference
identity, object semantics, or layout cues. SEFS pursues the same separation ob-
jective through data construction and token design rather than encoder capacity:
content is represented by explicit structural conditions, while style is represented
by low-resolution appearance tokens. This design avoids learning a separate style
encoder and addresses content leakage through the scale of the style signal.
Limitations. Because SEFS deliberately compresses the style reference into
low-resolution tokens, it is designed primarily for transferable local appearance
statistics rather than exact global composition. It may therefore under-transfer


14
J. Zhang et al.
styles whose identity depends on symbolic motifs, legible text, object-level shapes,
or precise layout. This is the main trade-off of the proposed bottleneck: reducing
reference-structure leakage can also suppress non-local style cues. The method
also inherits errors from structural preprocessing, where inaccurate Canny edges
or SAM masks can weaken content preservation. These limitations suggest future
work on adaptive multi-scale style tokens and more robust structural conditioning.
6
Conclusion
We presented SEFS (Style-Encoder-Free Stylization), a style-encoder-free diffusion
stylization framework based on scale-separated conditioning. Instead of extracting
style with an auxiliary visual encoder or relying on aligned triplets, SEFS learns
style tokens from stochastic low-resolution crops of unpaired single images. With
target-derived structural cues, re-normalization, and skip fusion, SEFS preserves
target structure while transferring reference appearance. Cross-image comparisons,
matched controls, and ablations indicate that the crop-token bottleneck reduces
reference-layout leakage while retaining transferable style cues; the automatic
metrics are used as diagnostics rather than complete definitions of stylization
quality.
References
1. Bertalmio, M., Sapiro, G., Caselles, V., Ballester, C.: Image inpainting. In: SIG-
GRAPH (2000)
2. Brooks, T., Holynski, A., Efros, A.A.: Instructpix2pix: Learning to follow image
editing instructions. In: CVPR (2023)
3. Canny, J.: A computational approach to edge detection. TPAMI (1986)
4. Chen, J., Ge, C., Xie, E., Wu, Y., Yao, L., Ren, X., Wang, Z., Luo, P., Lu, H., Li, Z.:
Pixart-sigma: Weak-to-strong training of diffusion transformer for 4k text-to-image
generation. In: ECCV. pp. 74–91 (2024)
5. Chen, J., Yu, J., Ge, C., Yao, L., Xie, E., Wu, Y., Wang, Z., Kwok, J., Luo, P.,
Lu, H., et al.: Pixart-alpha: Fast training of diffusion transformer for photorealistic
text-to-image synthesis. ICLR (2024)
6. Chung, J., Hyun, S., Heo, J.P.: Style injection in diffusion: A training-free approach
for adapting large-scale diffusion models for style transfer. In: CVPR (2024)
7. Deng, Y., Tang, F., Dong, W., Ma, C., Pan, X., Wang, L., Xu, C.: Stytr2: Image
style transfer with transformers. In: CVPR (2022)
8. Esser, P., Kulal, S., Blattmann, A., Entezari, R., Müller, J., Saini, H., Levi, Y.,
Lorenz, D., Sauer, A., Boesel, F., et al.: Scaling rectified flow transformers for
high-resolution image synthesis. In: ICML (2024)
9. Gao, J., Sun, Y., Liu, Y., Tang, Y., Zeng, Y., Qi, D., Chen, K., Zhao, C.: Styleshot:
A snapshot on any style. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine
Intelligence 48(2), 1215–1228 (2026)
10. Hertz, A., Voynov, A., Fruchter, S., Cohen-Or, D.: Style aligned image generation
via shared attention. In: CVPR (2024)
11. Hu, E.J., Wallis, P., Allen-Zhu, Z., Li, Y., Wang, S., Wang, L., Chen, W., et al.:
Lora: Low-rank adaptation of large language models. In: ICLR (2022)


Scale-Separated Conditioning for Diffusion Stylization
15
12. Huang, X., Belongie, S.: Arbitrary style transfer in real-time with adaptive instance
normalization. In: ICCV (2017)
13. Jeong, J., Kim, J., Choi, Y., Lee, G., Uh, Y.: Visual style prompting with swapping
self-attention. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.12974 (2024)
14. Kawar, B., Zada, S., Lang, O., Tov, O., Chang, H., Dekel, T., Mosseri, I., Irani, M.:
Imagic: Text-based real image editing with diffusion models. In: CVPR (2023)
15. Kirillov, A., Mintun, E., Ravi, N., Mao, H., Rolland, C., Gustafson, L., Xiao, T.,
Whitehead, S., Berg, A.C., Lo, W.Y., et al.: Segment anything. In: ICCV (2023)
16. Liu, X., Gong, C., et al.: Flow straight and fast: Learning to generate and transfer
data with rectified flow. In: ICLR (2023)
17. Loshchilov, I., Hutter, F.: Decoupled weight decay regularization. In: ICLR (2019)
18. Peebles, W., Xie, S.: Scalable diffusion models with transformers. In: ICCV (2023)
19. Podell, D., English, Z., Lacey, K., Blattmann, A., Dockhorn, T., Müller, J., Penna,
J., Rombach, R.: Sdxl: Improving latent diffusion models for high-resolution image
synthesis. In: ICLR (2024)
20. Qi, T., Fang, S., Wu, Y., Xie, H., Liu, J., Chen, L., He, Q., Zhang, Y.: Deadiff: An
efficient stylization diffusion model with disentangled representations. In: CVPR
(2024)
21. Rombach, R., Blattmann, A., Lorenz, D., Esser, P., Ommer, B.: High-resolution
image synthesis with latent diffusion models. In: CVPR (2022)
22. Ruiz, N., Li, Y., Jampani, V., Pritch, Y., Rubinstein, M., Aberman, K.: Dreambooth:
Fine tuning text-to-image diffusion models for subject-driven generation. In: CVPR
(2023)
23. Shi, Y., Xue, C., Liew, J.H., Pan, J., Yan, H., Zhang, W., Tan, V.Y., Bai, S.:
Dragdiffusion: Harnessing diffusion models for interactive point-based image editing.
In: CVPR (2024)
24. Tan, S., Li, H., Zhang, J., Jia, X., Yang, X., Zhang, S., Zhang, Y.: SWIFT: Prompt-
adaptive memory for efficient interactive long video generation. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2605.09442 (2026)
25. Tan, W.R., Chan, C.S., Aguirre, H.E., Tanaka, K.: Ceci n’est pas une pipe: A deep
convolutional network for fine-art paintings classification. In: ICIP (2016)
26. Wallace, B., Gokul, A., Naik, N.: Edict: Exact diffusion inversion via coupled
transformations. In: CVPR (2023)
27. Xie, S., Tu, Z.: Holistically-nested edge detection. In: ICCV (2015)
28. Xing, P., Wang, H., Sun, Y., Wang, Q., Bai, X., Ai, H., Huang, J.Y., Li, Z.:
Csgo: Content-style composition in text-to-image generation. In: NeurIPS. pp.
111464–111504 (2025)
29. Ye, H., Zhang, J., Liu, S., Han, X., Yang, W.: Ip-adapter: Text compatible image
prompt adapter for text-to-image diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.06721
(2023)
30. Zhang, L., Rao, A., Agrawala, M.: Adding conditional control to text-to-image
diffusion models. In: ICCV (2023)
31. Zhang, S., Huang, J., Zhou, Q., Wang, F., Luo, J., Yan, J., et al.: Continuous-
multiple image outpainting in one-step via positional query and a diffusion-based
approach. In: ICLR (2024)
32. Zheng, G., Chen, H., Li, H., Zhang, J., Yang, Z., Jia, X., Yang, X., Zhang, S.,
Zhang, Y.: Enhancing video physical consistency via role-aware joint training and
modality-decoupled denoising. arXiv preprint arXiv:2607.04653 (2026)
