Title: TunerDiT: Training-free Progressive Steering of Diffusion Transformer for Multi-Event Video Generation

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.31590v1

Published Time: Mon, 01 Jun 2026 01:44:27 GMT

Number of Pages: 17

Markdown Content:
# TunerDiT: Training-free Progressive Steering of Diffusion Transformer for Consistent Multi-Event Video Generation 

## Ruotong Liao 1,3∗ Guowen Huang 2∗ Qing Cheng 2 Guangyao Zhai 2 Lei Zhang 4

## Xun Xiao 5 Thomas Seidl 1,3 Daniel Cremers 2,3 Volker Tresp 1,31 Ludwig Maximilian University of Munich 2 Technical University of Munich 

3 MCML 4 University of Hamburg 5 Huawei European Research Institute Project page: https://tunerdit.github.io 

Figure 1. Different denoising steps utilize text inputs differently. TunerDiT finds this insight by probing prompt conditioning of video diffusion models. When switching the input prompt at various fractions of the denoising steps (e.g., 0%, 10%, 20%, 40%, 70%, 100%), it is observed that early steps dominate the global layout while late steps refine fine-grained appearance and motion, revealing intrinsic turning points where text influence changes. Building on this insight, TunerDiT is a training-free, progressive steering method for video DiTs, yielding consistent multi-event videos with clear boundaries and smooth transitions. 

## Abstract 

Text-to-video (T2V) generation faces challenging ques-tions when generating videos with long horizons contain-ing multiple events Inspired by the intrinsics of the diffu-sion process, we probe video diffusion transformers (DiTs) and uncover intrinsic turning points in the DiT denoising trajectory where conditioning text affects generation from global layout to fine-grained details. Building on this find-ing, we present TunerDiT , a simple yet effective progres-sive steering method that requires no additional training for multi-event generation. TunerDiT comprises two steering handles: (1) Event-Partitioned Masking that enforces event boundaries while allowing cross-event transition bands; (2) 

> ∗Equal contribution.

Cross-Event Prompt Fusion that injects neighboring event semantics for late-stage refinement. We contribute a self-curated prompt suite for benchmarking multi-event gener-ation, i.e. Meve . TunerDiT achieves state-of-the-art per-formance across 8 metrics and offers a tunable trade-off between video consistency and event separation, compared with other training-free methods. The improvement in text alignment increases with the event count, indicating a scal-ing possibility with increasing event count. 

## 1. Introduction 

Recent advances in text-to-video (T2V) generation have been largely driven by diffusion transformers (DiTs) [6, 30, 46] . Models such as CogVideoX [11, 48] and Open-1

> arXiv:2605.31590v1 [cs.CV] 29 May 2026

Sora [25] adopt DiT-style architectures with spatial-temporal self-attention, 3D VAEs [27], and large-scale pretrain-ing, achieving impressive visual quality on short clips for one good moment, which are insufficient for long-horizon, multi-event sceinarios required by many real-world applica-tions [7, 16, 19, 22, 23, 26, 49], such as long-horizon robotic planning, autonomous driving, interactive world models, etc. When naively repurposed for multi-event generation via direct concatenation of event prompts in time or text, existing methods exhibit clear, distinct failure patterns. The result-ing synthesis either blends all events into a single muddled scene. The core desiderata of multi-event video genera-tion are: (1) Event ordering : clear event boundaries and correct temporal ordering; (2) Smooth transitions : smooth handovers between events; (3) Semantic Consistency : fine-grained semantic consistency across events bidirectionally between early and late events. Only limited work brings attention to multi-event T2V generation that [2, 24, 28, 33, 34, 43] directly address these questions. Achieving these requirements simultaneously has been proven computationally expensive [17, 45] and hard to scale to more events beyond the training scope. Other computationally light works achieve adequate but not satis-factory performance [2, 28, 42]. However, looking inward at the denoising dynamics and cross-attention structure of DiTs indicates a more principled and computationally tractable approach that can simultaneously address the comprehen-sive core demands of multi-event generation. Inspired by observations in text-to-image (T2I) diffusion that generation proceeds from coarse global structure to fine-grained details over the denoising trajectory [1, 5, 47], we hypothesize that Video DiTs exhibit analogous behavior in T2V generation, given the shared intrinsic properties of the diffusion process. Under this assumption, the temporal or-dering of video events can be viewed as an additional dimen-sion of fine-grained detail to be refined over the denoising process, rather than as a single monolithic structure. To validate the hypothesis, we first curate a benchmark suite Meve that consists of multi-event prompts from multi-ple aspects. After systematically probing off-the-shelf DiT video generators by switching event conditioning at different denoising timestep fractions, we observe the resulting text-video similarity [17] as shown in Figure 1. Consequently, we identify that text conditioning on early steps dominates the global video layout while text conditioning on late steps refines fine-grained appearance and motion, revealing the intrinsic turning point where text influence changes and is remarkably relatively stable within a model. Building on this insight, we introduce TunerDiT , a pro-gressive coarse-to-fine steering framework for multi-event T2V generation that operates without training . The idea is to first generate a shared layout of multiple events and refine in-ner event details at a certain later stage. TunerDiT contains steerable control handles targeting different challenges men-tioned above and exploits intrinsic turning points in the DiT denoising process by intervening at the appropriate phase. Concretely, TunerDiT sets two steering handles to be acti-vated according to a schedule: 

• Cross-Event Prompt Fusion. A gating scheme that con-ditions video latents on event prompts to enhance semantic awareness and coherence. 

• Event Partitioned Mask. A diagonal mask that isolates events with connecting bands across events on DiT atten-tion layers. The mask design restrains DiT’s attention to enforce event boundaries and ensure smooth handovers. Extensive experiments validate the effectiveness of 

TunerDiT . We achieve state-of-the-art results in multi-event video generation up to four events, with principal extensibility to more. TunerDiT consistently improves background consistency, identity consistency, text–video alignment, and transition smoothness over strong baselines. 

TunerDiT is performed at inference time and executed on a single A100 GPU, making our method cost-effective for real-world deployment. To summarize, our contributions are as follows: 

• We propose MEve , a benchmark prompt suite for multi-event video generation up to 4 events in multiple aspects. 

• We share the insight of intrinsic turning point from coarse to fine-grained generation in the Video DiT dif-fusion process. 

• We propose TunerDiT , a tuner console-like steering ap-proach for video diffusion transformers to generate multi-event consistent videos under a training-free setting. 

## 2. Related Work 

DiT-based Video Generation Recent works such as CogVideoX [11, 48], Mochi 1 [39], Movie Gen [31], and Hunyuan [21, 38], VideoCrafter [4], etc, have adopted the DiT [30] architecture and achieved impressive results on generating one good moment. In this work, we build upon the open-source model OpenSora [20, 25]. The architecture evolved from a Spatial-Temporal DiT (ST-DiT) structure to a dual-stream DiT. ST-DiT employs separate spatial and tem-poral attention blocks for frame-level and temporal process-ing, while the dual-stream DiT integrates image and text through parallel streams with unified attention mechanisms in one whole matrix. 

Multi Event Video Generation Some works autoregres-sively generate videos based on the previous frames, which lose control of the global common sense of multi-events [18, 42]. Some make contributions to attentive mechanisms in DiT layers, e.g, introducing a temporal cross-attention layer that attends to different event scopes [45], introduc-2ing transition tokens between cross-event text and video cross-attentions [17], or introducing symmetric masking on text-video cross-attention to ensure isolation among events at the cost of sharp scene transitions [32], etc. These works demand significantly intensive computational resources and meticulously labeled video training data, yet they tend to deliver adequate but not exceptional results. Consequently, some zero-shot methods are witnessed. They either focus on the guiding diffusion process based on last frame-aware latent initialization, while ignoring the impact regarding global consistency [28], or on semantic priors on compositional layouts, but ignoring temporal or-ders [51], or on sharing subject-related attention by segment-ing its binary mask [2], which are better for background transition instead of subject-related motion change across events. However, the proposed TunerDiT is the first zero-shot method to tackle event ordering, smooth transition, and global semantic consistency together from a unified start-ing perspective of the intrinsics of the diffusion process and proposes a progressive steering method. 

## 3. The Intrinsic Turning Point in DiT 

In this section, we first introduce the failure mode of gen-eral DiT-based Video Diffusion Models in generating multi-events, then introduce the hypothesis of the varying text conditioning effects at different diffusion step fractions in DiTs. To validate this hypothesis, we propose a new bench-mark Meve and probe the intrinsic points in the DiT models, and show the resulting insight. 

3.1. Failure Modes in DiT-based models. 

Existing DiT video diffusion models face many issues like: 

(a) Event fusion. All prompts are entangled into a sin-gle blended scene; Objects and actions from different events co-occur in most frames. 

(b) Srambling order. Events appear in random order or overlap with earlier ones, leading to ambiguous event order-ing and even disappearing. 

(c) Transition collapse. Transitions are either abrupt frame-wise jumps or overly smooth morphs without clear event boundaries, harming event isolation. 

3.2. Benchmark, Hypothesis & Validation: Intrin-sic Turning Point. 

Hypothesis: from T2I to T2V. Inspired by phenomena in text-to-image (T2I) [1, 5, 47] that the diffusion process generates images from coarse to fine-grained, we hypoth-esize that the same happens for text-to-video (T2V) with Video DiTs due to the shared intrinsics of the diffusion pro-cess. If so, it is possible to treat the temporal dynamics of video events as an additional dimension of fine-grained details instead of a one-time generation. 

Validation: Switching Denoising Fractions. For sim-plicity in validating our hypothesis, we utilize two events for switching text conditioning during the iterative denois-ing process, noted by P 1 and P 2. As shown in Figure 1, we change the input text to P 2 after a fixed percentage of denoising steps have been performed using P 1. Comparing results from left to right, we note that the text inputs have limited visible impact on the output when used in the first 10% percent and gradually become more visible as the per-centage goes up, especially in the appearance of the subject, which suggests text prompts affect only fine-grained de-tails in the last denoising steps. As the percentage goes up continuously, the output shows influences fused from both prompts and gradually overrides the first text input’s lay-out. From this observation, we find the denoiser utilizes text input differently at different noise levels, early steps domi-nate layouts, while the later steps refine details. Hence, we construct a benchmark to systematically probe the intrinsic turning point of DiTs. 

Benchmark: Meve Existing T2V evaluation bench-marks focus on single-shot generation, dual-shot transi-tions, and seldom tackle multi-event prompts systemati-cally [13, 14, 53]. To systematically evaluate multi–event synthesis, we construct MEve , a prompt suite comprising multi-event prompts collected from three complementary sources, spanning up to four events per prompt. Sources include (1) LLM as a data synthesizer that generates per instructions [17]; (2) Prompts of diagnostic content that are expanded from VBench 2.0 categories [50, 53]; and (3) Prompts of viewpoint control that are paired in 1st view and 3rd views curated from video narrations in Ego–Exo4D [10]. Refer to Appendix A for construction details. Data statistics are shown in Figure 3a,3b. 

Probing: from Coarse to Fine-grained. As shown in Figure 4a, to probe exactly when the turning points from coarse to fine-grain controlling of text conditioning occur in denoising steps, we separate two event prompts P 1 and P 2

and parameterize the dual–prompt conditioning schedule in the following: Let 𝑥 ∈ [ 0, 1] be the fusion ratio and 𝑛 ∈ [ 0, 𝑁 ] the denoising step, the conditioning schedule be cond (𝑛 ) =

(

P1, 𝑛 < 𝑥𝑁, 

P2, 𝑛 ≥ 𝑥𝑁 , 

so that the early diffusion steps, proportion 𝑥 , are condi-tioned by P 1 and the late diffusion steps, proportion 1 −𝑥 , are conditioned by P 2.The intrinsic turning point 𝜏 is defined as the one whose step is the latest and closest to the observed intersection of text video alignment score in a group of paired video 3Figure 2. DiT video diffusion models failed with multi-event prompting.                                                        

> Category View Events/Prompt #Prompts
> General 3rd 460 Motion Order 3rd 498 Human Identity 3rd 432 Complex Plot 3rd 460 Ego-Exo4D (paired) 1st & 3rd 450 ×2(a) Composition statistics per MEve category.
> Benchmark Shot Counts Multi-Scene Multi-Event Real-world Reference View Control VBench 1××××
> VBench++ 1××××
> VBench2.0 1××××
> WorldScore 3✓×✓✓
> MVBench 2✓××✓
> MEve 4✓✓✓✓
> (b) Comparison with existing video generation benchmarks.
> (c) Category and view distribution of MEve .
> (d) Experiment results on MEve for probing turning points.

Figure 3. MEve and turning-point analysis. (a,c) Dataset structure: category and view distribution statistics. (b) Position of MEve among existing video generation benchmarks. (d) Probing results revealing intrinsic turning points for event control in Video DiTs. 

events, i.e. 𝜏 = ⌊𝑥𝑁 ⌋. The intuition behind this is that the step is where the DiTs hesitate to determine which is the dominant event layout. For steps previous to 𝜏 

we condition on P 1; for steps starting from 𝜏 we condi-tion on P 2. In practice, we sweep 𝑥 over a fixed grid 

X = {0, 0.1, 0.2, . . . , 1.0} (i.e., Δ𝑥 = 0.1). and we lo-cate the 𝜏 when Text Alightment scores are intersecting for both prompts as the intrinsic turning points. 

The position of the intrinsic turning point. Surprisingly, this intrinsic turning point 𝜏 remains relatively stable for a given model, despite slight shifts across different event cat-egories. Empirically, shown in Figure 1 and Figure 3d, we observe that Text Alignment (TA) increases sharply within the early denoising steps. The turning point of the domi-nance of the second prompt comes in 𝑥 ∈ [ 0, 0.3], followed by a broad plateau. This indicates that the temporal turning point is set early in diffusion denoising steps: exposing the model to a new event P 2 within the first ∼ 30% steps is sufficient to trigger a shift, while later steps have a dimin-ishing influence. In other words, 𝜏 marks an internal phase boundary of the diffusion process where text conditioning transitions from structuring the coarse multi-event layout to refining high-frequency details. DiT-based video diffusion models implicitly separate layout planning and detail refine-ment along the denoising trajectory, and the location of this separation can be utilized as a controllable “tuning knob” for multi-event generation. 

## 4. Method: TunerDiT 

In this section, we present TunerDiT (Alg. 1), a training-free progressive steering framework that addresses event ordering, transition smoothness, and semantic-aware global consistency. TunerDiT follows the coarse-to-fine schedule 4Diffusion Steps 

> Prompt 1
> Text Alignment

! n

0 1 n N-1 N  

> !Prompt 1 (a) Probing the turning point.

# …

Diffusion Steps 

N

0

## Event -Partitioned 

## Mask (EM) 

## Original Matrix T1: The person 

> rubs the chalk on
> both hands.
> T2: The person
> chops ginger.
> T3: The person
> wipes the knife
> blade clean with
> a cloth.

# TunerDiT Cross -Event 

## Prompt Fusion (PF) 

!PF 

!EM 

# … Diagnal  

> Mask
> Inner
> Band
> Inter
> Band (b) Turning point guided steering controls applied over denoising steps.

Figure 4. TunerDiT progressively steers multi-event generation over diffusion steps. Cross-Event Prompt Fusion (PF) first shares a common prompt to build a coherent layout, then gradually separates event prompts. Event-Partitioned Mask (EM) subsequently enforces event isolation via diagonal cross-attention blocks and introduces cross-event transition bands around boundaries, enabling smooth and semantically consistent handovers between events. 

revealed by the intrinsic turning-point analysis ( §3) and op-erates in two phases: (1) Cross-Event Prompt Fusion that first generates a shared global layout ( §4.1); and (2) an Event Partitioned Mask that progressively separates events while connects events with smooth transitions ( §4.2). 

4.1. Cross-Event Prompt Fusion 

Having the intrinsic turning point 𝜏 ★ probed for a model, 

TunerDiT first sets up a 𝜏 𝑃𝐹 as a tunable gating hyperpa-rameter near to 𝜏 ★ for prompt fusion. Intuitively, the aim is to exploit the early denoising steps before 𝜏 𝑃𝐹 to establish a coherent global layout before forcing the DiTs to distinguish events after 𝜏 𝑃𝐹 . Let 𝐸 be the number of events and 𝑃 𝑒 the prompt of event 𝑒 with text embeddings: 

𝑇 𝑒 = 𝑓 text (𝑃 𝑒 ) ∈ R𝑚 𝑒 ×𝑑 , 𝑒 = 1, . . . , 𝐸, 

and concatenate them into 𝑇 = [𝑇 1; . . . ; 𝑇 𝐸 ].

Temporal gating of PF. For diffusion step 𝑛 ∈{1, . . . , 𝑁 } TunerDiT constructs the effective text tokens 

b𝑇 𝑒 (𝑛 ) as 

b𝑇 𝑒 (𝑛 ) =

(

𝑇 1, 𝑛 < 𝜏 PF ,𝑇 𝑒 , 𝑛 ≥ 𝜏 PF , (1) and b𝑇 (𝑛 ) = [b𝑇 1 (𝑛 ); . . . ; b𝑇 𝐸 (𝑛 )] .Thus, in the coarse layout diffusion phase when 𝑛 < 𝜏 PF ,all video tokens are conditioned on the first-event prompt 𝑃 1,encouraging a globally consistent scene and camera layout shared across the whole sequence. After the gate 𝜏 PF , the model starts to differentiate between events content details by conditioning video embeddings on their own event text embeddings, effectively “unfusing” the prompts and handing control over to event-specific conditioning. 

Algorithm 1 Progressive steering schedule of TunerDiT Require Event embeddings {𝑇 1, . . . , 𝑇 𝐸 }, video embedding 

𝑉 , 

> 1:

total denoising steps 𝑁 

Require Candidate ratios 𝑥 list EM , 𝑥 list PF 

Ensure Progressive DiT attention with prompt fusion and event masking  

> 2:

⊲ EM : select the best event-partitioning ratio  

> 3:

𝑥 EM ← arg max 𝑥 ∈ 𝑥 list EM 

TA EM (𝑥 ) 

> 4:

𝜏 EM ← ⌊ 𝑁 · 𝑥 EM ⌋ 

> 5:

⊲ PF : select the best prompt-fusion ratio  

> 6:

𝑥 PF ← arg max 𝑥 ∈ 𝑥 list PF 

TA PF |EM (𝑥 ) 

> 7:

𝜏 PF ← ⌊ 𝑁 · 𝑥 PF ⌋ 

> 8:

for 𝑛 = 0 to 𝑁 − 1 do  

> 9:

⊲ PF : activation of cross-event prompt fusion  

> 10:

if 𝑛 ≤ 𝜏 PF then  

> 11:

𝑇 (𝑛 ) ← concat (𝑇 1, 𝑇 1, . . . , 𝑇 1) 

> 12:

else  

> 13:

𝑇 (𝑛 ) ← concat (𝑇 1, 𝑇 2, . . . , 𝑇 𝐸 ) 

> 14:

end if  

> 15:

⊲ EM : activation of event-partitioned mask  

> 16:

if 𝑛 ≥ 𝜏 EM then  

> 17:

𝐷 (𝑛 ) ← GetEventMask (𝐸, 𝑉 ) 

> 18:

else  

> 19:

𝐷 (𝑛 ) ← ∅  

> 20:

end if  

> 21:

⊲ DiT update : perform steered conditioning  

> 22:

𝑉 ← DiTAttention (𝑉, 𝑇 (𝑛 ), 𝐷 (𝑛 ))  

> 23:

end for 

54.2. Event-Partitioned Diagonal Mask 

After PF builds a shared layout, TunerDiT activates the 

Event-Partitioned Diagonal Mask (EM) to separate events while preserving smooth transitions. EM is applied after the denoising step 𝜏 EM shown in Algorithm 1. Let the video tokens be divided into 𝐸 consecutive event segments 

𝑉 = [𝑉 1; . . . ; 𝑉 𝐸 ],

and let the text tokens be divided into the corresponding event prompts 

𝑇 (𝑛 ) = [𝑇 1 (𝑛 ); . . . ; 𝑇 𝐸 (𝑛 )] .

Here, 𝑉 𝑒 and 𝑇 𝑒 (𝑛 ) denote the video and text tokens associ-ated with event 𝑒 .

Event-partitioned diagonal mask. The diagonal mask keeps each event segment focused on its own event prompt. Specifically, for video tokens in segment 𝑉 𝑒 , EM mainly allows attention to the matching text tokens 𝑇 𝑒 (𝑛 ) and sup-presses attention to unrelated event prompts. This produces an event-wise diagonal attention pattern: 

𝐷 diag = diag  𝑉 1 ↔ 𝑇 1, 𝑉 2 ↔ 𝑇 2, . . . , 𝑉 𝐸 ↔ 𝑇 𝐸 

,

where 𝐷 diag denotes the binary-pass attention map for event-matched video–text pairs. This prevents semantic leakage across events and helps preserve the event order. 

Transition bands. Transition bands allow neighboring events to communicate only near their boundary. A purely diagonal mask can create hard cuts between adjacent events, so for each boundary 𝑒 → 𝑒 + 1, we augment the diagonal structure with narrow rectangular bands. We use two types of bands 𝐷 band : an inner-event band 𝐷 𝑣 ←𝑣  

> inner

in video self-attention, and inter-event bands 𝐷 𝑣 ←𝑡  

> inter

and 𝐷 𝑡 ←𝑣  

> inter

in video– text cross-attention. The inter-event bands allow boundary video tokens to attend to neighboring event text tokens, while the inner-event band lets video latents on both sides of the boundary exchange information in the latent space. The band width is controlled by a ratio 𝑟 ∈ ( 0, 1). For event 𝑒 with |𝑉 𝑒 | video tokens and |𝑇 𝑒 | text tokens, we set 

ℎ𝑣𝑣 𝑒 = ℎ𝑣𝑡 𝑒 = ⌊𝑟 |𝑉 𝑒 |⌋ , 𝑤 𝑣𝑡 𝑒 = ⌊𝑟 |𝑇 𝑒 |⌋ .

Here, ℎ𝑣𝑣 𝑒 and ℎ𝑣𝑡 𝑒 determine the number of video tokens near the boundary that participate in the transition, and 𝑤 𝑣𝑡 𝑒 

determines the number of neighboring text tokens visible in cross-attention. Larger 𝑟 allows broader boundary neigh-borhoods to exchange information, while smaller 𝑟 restricts the interaction to a tighter transition region. 

Temporal gating of EM. EM is disabled before 𝜏 EM and enabled only after the global layout has stabilized. Before 

𝜏 EM , all video tokens can attend to all text tokens. After 𝜏 EM ,only the event-wise diagonal blocks and transition bands are allowed: 

𝐷 𝑣 ←𝑡  

> EM

(𝑛 ) =

(

1, 𝑛 < 𝜏 EM ,𝐷 diag ∨ 𝐷 band , 𝑛 ≥ 𝜏 EM ,

where ∨ denotes element-wise logical OR. The additive attention mask is then 

𝑀 𝑣 ←𝑡  

> EM

(𝑛 ) = (−∞) ·  1 − 𝐷 𝑣 ←𝑡  

> EM

(𝑛 ) ,

which is added to the attention logits before the softmax. For text-to-video attention, we use the transpose of the same mask. For video self-attention, we apply the same event-wise blocking rule and keep boundary bands between ad-jacent video segments. Thus, EM isolates unrelated events while preserving enough boundary context for transitions. 

## 5. Experiments 

5.1. Emperimental Setup 

Implementation Details In this work, we apply 

TunerDiT on the representative large open-source models OpenSora 1.2 [25], OpenSora 2.0 [20], and Wan 2.2 [41], spanning across different DiT structures, e.g., unified at-tention and factorized attention. Multi-event generation is evaluated on the proposed MEve dataset in a training-free setting. To ensure a fair evaluation, each model generates videos using its native supported frame count and resolution specifications when provided with identical text prompts. For more information regarding mask sizes, turning point indices, etc., please refer to Appendix B. 

Baselines To comprehensively evaluate the proposed framework, we benchmarked it against a diverse set of re-cent text-to-video methods covering both single-event and multi-event generation paradigms. For open-source T2V large models, we included Open-Sora 1.2/2.0 as strong diffusion-transformer backbones representing large-scale open models. We further compared with zero-shot base-lines for fair comparison, i.e., MEVG [28], DiTCtrl [2], and FreeNoise [34]. 

Metrics We evaluate multi-event generation from three complementary perspectives: (1) automatic embedding/segmentation-based metrics adapted from single-shot T2V protocols; (2) VLM-as-judge scores; and (3) human evaluations. 

(1) Embedding-based automatic metrics. Following commonly used metrics in single–shot T2V evaluation [45], their multi-shot adaptations in [17], and additionally pro-posed by [2], we report five automatic metrics: 6Table 1. Quantitative comparison and preference-aligned evaluation. (a) Quantitative metrics across {TA, TIS, BC, IC, CSCV } and varying shot numbers {2, 3, 4 }. (b) VLM-as-a-judge EI/TVA and human user study scores.                                                                                                                                                                   

> (a) Quantitative comparison of different models across five metrics. Metrics with the highest value are highlighted in bold and the second best are underlined.
> TA ↑TIS ↑BC ↑IC ↑CSCV ↑
> Shot Number 234234234234234Zero-shot Methods
> MEVG 0.201 0.206 0.205 0.271 0.270 0.272 0.228 0.249 0.270 0.269 0.270 0.270 0.688 0.703 0.707 DiTCtrl 0.186 0.207 0.216 0.259 0.271 0.278 0.303 0.377 0.394 0.280 0.354 0.389 0.826 0.819 0.803 FreeNoise 0.197 0.199 0.206 0.272 0.267 0.275 0.275 0.401 0.431 0.273 0.372 0.428 0.732 0.743 0.748
> Ours TunerDiT Wan2.2 0.201 0.211 0.211 0.273 0.277 0.279 0.619 0.575 0.669 0.516 0.512 0.660 0.831 0.840 0.830
> TunerDiT Open-Sora 1.2 0.202 0.211 0.213 0.277 0.284 0.281 0.508 0.472 0.496 0.452 0.452 0.460 0.848 0.839 0.844
> TunerDiT Open-Sora 2.0 0.210 0.213 0.219 0.280 0.277 0.287 0.501 0.532 0.496 0.411 0.488 0.466 0.866 0.883 0.854
> (b) Evaluation metrics with human preference alignment. Left: VLM-as-a-judge for Event Isolation and Text-Video Alignment; right: human user study scores (18 people).
> Name EI TVA Zero-shot Methods
> MEVG 0.435 1.375 FreeNoise 0.436 1.400 DitCtrl 0.375 1.425
> Ours TunerDiT Wan 2.2 0.474 1.503
> TunerDiT Open-Sora 1.2 0.499 1.492
> TunerDiT Open-Sora 2.0 0.572 1.533 Model Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Zero-shot Methods
> MEVG 1.82 1.91 1.82 2.05 FreeNoise 1.99 2.01 1.99 1.79 DiTCtrl 2.11 2.03 2.18 2.35
> Ours TunerDiT Wan 2.2 3.01 2.97 2.82 3.30
> TunerDiT OpenSora 1.2 2.66 2.63 2.62 2.94
> TunerDiT Open-Sora 2.0 3.16 3.03 3.03 3.34

• Text Alignment (TA). We assess text–video alignment by computing the cosine similarity between event-level text features and video features extracted by ViCLIP [44], and then averaging across events. 

• Identity Consistency (IC). We quantify subject consistency by segmenting foreground entities with YOLOv11 [15] at the middle frame of each event and computing the average DINOv2 [29] embedding similar-ity across events. 

• Background Consistency (BC). We measure scene conti-nuity by segmenting background regions with SAM2 [36] and computing DINOv2 embedding similarity between midpoint frames of different events. 

• Text–Image Similarity (TIS). We report CLIP similar-ity [35] between the prompt and uniformly sampled frames from the generated video, following the TIS protocol of VBench 2.0 [12]. This reflects global semantic alignment of the full multi-event clip. 

• Clip Similarity Coefficient of Variation (CSCV). CSCV computes the coefficient of variation of CLIP similari-ties across temporally sampled frames: it captures how smoothly the alignment score evolves across events, with higher CSCV indicating more stable, temporally coherent prompt adherence: 𝑠 𝑖 = x⊤ 

> 𝑖

x𝑖 +1, 𝑖 = 1, . . . , 𝑛 − 1, with 

CSCV = 11+𝜆 · 𝜎 (𝑠 ) 

> 𝜇 (𝑠 )

.

(2) VLM-as-judge metrics. Beyond hand-crafted met-rics, we further propose to evaluate videos generation with a vision–language model (VLM)-as-a-judge. For each gener-ated video, we uniformly sample frames and query Gemini-2.5-Flash[8] to produce a caption for each frame and an overall summary of the clip. Based on captions, we define: 

• Event Isolation (EI). From the summary caption, Gemini-2.5-Flash predicts the number of distinct events in the video. We compare this prediction with the ground-truth event count using a binary indicator of correctness and report the average accuracy over all videos. 

• Text–Video Alignment (TVA). We encode both the ground-truth multi-event prompt and the VLM-generated summary caption with Sentence-BERT[37], compute their cosine similarity, and average over videos. TVA thus reflects how well the overall video semantics match the intended multi-event description from a language per-spective. 

(3) Human evaluation. Finally, we conduct a user study of 18 persons on a 5-point Likert scale, where annotators compare different models on four aspects: (Q1) overall video preference, (Q2) motion naturalness, (Q3) transition smoothness across events, and (Q4) text–video alignment. Detailed protocol, interface, annotator instructions, and ad-ditional statistics are provided in Appendix C. 

5.2. Experiment Results: Quantitative Analysis 

How is the TunerDiT steering quality of multi-event gen-eration? We summarize four findings from Table 1a: 

State of the art over existing baselines. Our method attains the highest overall performance across multi-event settings compared with zero-shot baselines on all eight met-7Figure 5. Qualitative comparison to various open-source base models (Open-Sora 1.2, Open-Sora 2.0 and Wan 2.2), direct concatenation of individual events (Concat), zero-shot multi-event baselines (MEVG, DitCtrl, FreeNoise). Our methods achieve the best performance in event ordering, transition smoothness, and semantic aware consistency. 

rics spanning from two to four event settings. Considering open-source base models, we are able to surpass text-video alignment at longer horizons (TA, TIS), remain compara-ble results on smoothness (CSCV), and achieve the highest consistency value (BC, IC). 

Best human-aligned preference performance. As shown in Table 1b, TunerDiT (Open-Sora 2.0) achieves the best VLM-as-a-judge scores, with the highest VLM-as-a-judge performance (EI = 0.572, TA = 1.533), and simul-taneously attains the top human preference scores across all four questions (Q1–Q4). Compared to the strongest zero-shot baseline DiTCtrl, this corresponds to absolute gains of 

+1.05, +1.00, +0.85, and +0.99 on overall quality, motion naturalness, transition smoothness, and text–video align-ment, respectively. These results indicate that TunerDiT 

not only improves multi-event generation in automatic eval-uation metrics but also aligns best with human judgments of video quality and coherence. 

5.3. Ablation Study 

Figure 6, 7 illustrate how each steering component in 

TunerDiT contributes to multi-event generation quality. Overall, we observe a clear tension between text align-     

> Figure 6. Per-component ablation results of TunerDiT .
> Figure 7. Metric trends of TunerDiT under different module combinations.

ment (TA, TIS) and visual consistency (BC, IC, CSCV): improving one group often degrades the other. But 

TunerDiT manages to achieve a balance .8Effect of Event-Partitioned Mask (EM). As shown in Figure 6, enabling EM substantially improves multi-event compliance. However, this comes at the cost of lower BC/IC/CSCV, since boundary enforcement caused by di-agonal and transition masks suppresses cross-event leakage, which inevitably harms global smoothness and consistency. The increase of TA/TIS indicates that events become more cleanly separated and better aligned with their prompts. 

Recovering consistency with Prompt Fusion (PF). 

Adding PF in TunerDiT restores a significant portion of the lost consistency while preserving most of the gains in multi-event alignment. In Figure 7, this manifests as im-proved BC/IC/CSCV compared to EM-only configurations, with even slight improvement in TA. PF therefore acts as a counter-balance to EM, yielding a more favorable trade-off between the two mutually inhibiting metric groups: event separation versus semantically coherent across events. More detailed discussion is positioned in Appendix D. 

5.4. Qualitative Analysis 

Figure 5 compares multi-event sequences for a three-step cooking prompt. The first is the direct concatenation of individual generation (Concat), which directly treats events as separate prompts as individual input to the generation process and then concatenates the video outputs together, which has the worst semantic consistency. The following three are naive multi-event prompting, showcasing the in-ability to tackle the three challenges, and generating the wrong event count and ordering. DitCtrl has worse text alignment and consistency when the event focuses on shift-ing motions. Overall, our method TunerDiT achieves the best visual quality in event ordering, transition smoothness, and consistency. For more examples, please refer to Ap-pendix E. 

5.5. Discussions !!" !#$ r

> Figure 8. Effect of steering position on multi-event generation. The steering-position behavior occurs mostly during the early stage of the diffusion process.

Investigation on steering position and transition band-width ratio. As shown in Fig. 8, TA is most sensitive to the position of the prompt–fusion gate 𝜏 PF : performance peaks when 𝜏 PF lies in the early denoising phase ( ≈ 0.0–0 .2

> Figure 9. Performance trends of TunerDiT as the number of events increases.

of the steps), confirming that steering the shared layout early is crucial for multi–event alignment. The EM steering point 

𝜏 EM exhibits a relatively flat plateau over a broad mid–range, however, it still peaks around 0 .1−0.2 before the very late re-finement steps. Varying the transition–band ratio 𝑟 further reveals that small to moderate bands ( 𝑟 ≈ 0.1–0 .3) yield the best TA and wide bands ( 𝑟 > 0.6) over–smooth bound-aries that revert to the wrong behaviors of not differentiating events. We therefore adopt an early 𝜏 PF , a mid–range 𝜏 EM ,and a moderate 𝑟 as default, which jointly give the strongest multi–event alignment. 

Increased performance on more event counts Figure 9 shows that TA (𝐸 ) increases as 𝐸 grows from two to four. Besides, we define the improvement gain over the cor-responding base video diffusion models as ΔTA (𝐸 ) =

TA TunerDiT (𝐸 ) − TA base (𝐸 ). Figure 9 indicates that ΔTA (𝐸 )

increases with 𝐸 . This suggests that the proposed steering is increasingly necessary at longer horizons. We attribute this trend to the factor that more events introduce more explicit temporal anchors and boundaries, which our steering modules exploit to stabilize ordering and reduce leakage across segments; 

Additional Analysis Additional thorough discussions, such as failure cases, investigation on event types, limita-tions, and future works, are in Appendix F. In-depth analysis of probing the intrinsic turning points is in [24]. 

## 6. Conclusion 

We presented TunerDiT, a training-free steering progressive framework for multi-event T2V generation by utilizing the intrinsic turning point where text guidance in DiTs shifts from global layout to fine details for better text-video alignment, smooth transitions, and content consistency. 9References 

[1] Yogesh Balaji, Seungjun Nah, Xun Huang, Arash Vahdat, Jiaming Song, Qinsheng Zhang, Karsten Kreis, Miika Ait-tala, Timo Aila, Samuli Laine, Bryan Catanzaro, Tero Kar-ras, and Ming-Yu Liu. ediff-i: Text-to-image diffusion models with ensemble of expert denoisers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.01324 , 2022. 2, 3 [2] Minghong Cai, Xiaodong Cun, Xiaoyu Li, Wenze Liu, Zhaoyang Zhang, Yong Zhang, Ying Shan, and Xiangyu Yue. Ditctrl: Exploring attention control in multi-modal diffusion transformer for tuning-free multi-prompt longer video gen-eration. In Proceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference , pages 7763–7772, 2025. 2, 3, 6 [3] Minghong Cai, Xiaodong Cun, Xiaoyu Li, Wenze Liu, Zhaoyang Zhang, Yong Zhang, Ying Shan, and Xiangyu Yue. Ditctrl: Exploring attention control in multi-modal diffusion transformer for tuning-free multi-prompt longer video gener-ation, 2025. 1 [4] Haoxin Chen, Yong Zhang, Xiaodong Cun, Menghan Xia, Xintao Wang, Chao Weng, and Ying Shan. Videocrafter2: Overcoming data limitations for high-quality video diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 7310–7320, 2024. 2 [5] Minghao Chen, Iro Laina, and Andrea Vedaldi. Training-free layout control with cross-attention guidance. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF winter conference on applications of com-puter vision , pages 5343–5353, 2024. 2, 3 [6] Shoufa Chen, Mengmeng Xu, Jiawei Ren, Yuren Cong, Sen He, Yanping Xie, Animesh Sinha, Ping Luo, Tao Xiang, and Juan-Manuel Perez-Rua. Gentron: Diffusion transformers for image and video generation, 2024. 1 [7] Joseph Cho, Fachrina Dewi Puspitasari, Sheng Zheng, Jingyao Zheng, Lik-Hang Lee, Tae-Ho Kim, Choong Seon Hong, and Chaoning Zhang. Sora as an agi world model? a complete survey on text-to-video generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.05131 , 2024. 2 [8] Gheorghe Comanici, Eric Bieber, Mike Schaekermann, and et al. Gemini 2.5: Pushing the frontier with advanced reason-ing, multimodality, long context, and next generation agentic capabilities, 2025. 7, 1 [9] Haoyi Duan, Hong-Xing Yu, Sirui Chen, Li Fei-Fei, and Jiajun Wu. Worldscore: A unified evaluation benchmark for world generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.00983 , 2025. 1 [10] Kristen Grauman, Andrew Westbury, Lorenzo Torresani, Kris Kitani, Jitendra Malik, Triantafyllos Afouras, Kumar Ashutosh, Vijay Baiyya, Siddhant Bansal, Bikram Boote, Eugene Byrne, Zach Chavis, Joya Chen, Feng Cheng, Fu-Jen Chu, Sean Crane, Avijit Dasgupta, Jing Dong, Maria Escobar, Cristhian Forigua, Abrham Gebreselasie, Sanjay Haresh, Jing Huang, Md Mohaiminul Islam, Suyog Jain, Rawal Khirodkar, Devansh Kukreja, Kevin J Liang, Jia-Wei Liu, Sagnik Ma-jumder, Yongsen Mao, Miguel Martin, Effrosyni Mavroudi, Tushar Nagarajan, Francesco Ragusa, Santhosh Kumar Ra-makrishnan, Luigi Seminara, Arjun Somayazulu, Yale Song, Shan Su, Zihui Xue, Edward Zhang, Jinxu Zhang, An-gela Castillo, Changan Chen, Xinzhu Fu, Ryosuke Furuta, Cristina Gonzalez, Prince Gupta, Jiabo Hu, Yifei Huang, Yiming Huang, Weslie Khoo, Anush Kumar, Robert Kuo, Sach Lakhavani, Miao Liu, Mi Luo, Zhengyi Luo, Brighid Meredith, Austin Miller, Oluwatumininu Oguntola, Xiaqing Pan, Penny Peng, Shraman Pramanick, Merey Ramazanova, Fiona Ryan, Wei Shan, Kiran Somasundaram, Chenan Song, Audrey Southerland, Masatoshi Tateno, Huiyu Wang, Yuchen Wang, Takuma Yagi, Mingfei Yan, Xitong Yang, Zecheng Yu, Shengxin Cindy Zha, Chen Zhao, Ziwei Zhao, Zhifan Zhu, Jeff Zhuo, Pablo Arbelaez, Gedas Bertasius, David Crandall, Dima Damen, Jakob Engel, Giovanni Maria Farinella, An-tonino Furnari, Bernard Ghanem, Judy Hoffman, C. V. Jawa-har, Richard Newcombe, Hyun Soo Park, James M. Rehg, Yoichi Sato, Manolis Savva, Jianbo Shi, Mike Zheng Shou, and Michael Wray. Ego-exo4d: Understanding skilled human activity from first- and third-person perspectives, 2024. 3, 1 [11] Wenyi Hong, Ming Ding, Wendi Zheng, Xinghan Liu, and Jie Tang. Cogvideo: Large-scale pretraining for text-to-video generation via transformers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.15868 , 2022. 1, 2 [12] Ziqi Huang, Yinan He, Jiashuo Yu, Fan Zhang, Chenyang Si, Yuming Jiang, Yuanhan Zhang, Tianxing Wu, Qingyang Jin, Nattapol Chanpaisit, Yaohui Wang, Xinyuan Chen, Limin Wang, Dahua Lin, Yu Qiao, and Ziwei Liu. Vbench: Compre-hensive benchmark suite for video generative models, 2023. 7, 1 [13] Ziqi Huang, Yinan He, Jiashuo Yu, Fan Zhang, Chenyang Si, Yuming Jiang, Yuanhan Zhang, Tianxing Wu, Qingyang Jin, Nattapol Chanpaisit, et al. Vbench: Comprehensive benchmark suite for video generative models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 21807–21818, 2024. 3 [14] Ziqi Huang, Fan Zhang, Xiaojie Xu, Yinan He, Jiashuo Yu, Ziyue Dong, Qianli Ma, Nattapol Chanpaisit, Chenyang Si, Yuming Jiang, Yaohui Wang, Xinyuan Chen, Ying-Cong Chen, Limin Wang, Dahua Lin, Yu Qiao, and Ziwei Liu. Vbench++: Comprehensive and versatile benchmark suite for video generative models, 2024. 3, 1 [15] Glenn Jocher and Jing Qiu. Ultralytics yolo11, 2024. 7 [16] Bingyi Kang, Yang Yue, Rui Lu, Zhijie Lin, Yang Zhao, Kaixin Wang, Gao Huang, and Jiashi Feng. How far is video generation from world model: A physical law perspective. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.02385 , 2024. 2 [17] Ozgur Kara, Krishna Kumar Singh, Feng Liu, Duygu Ceylan, James M Rehg, and Tobias Hinz. Shotadapter: Text-to-multi-shot video generation with diffusion models. In Proceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference ,pages 28405–28415, 2025. 2, 3, 6, 1 [18] Jihwan Kim, Junoh Kang, Jinyoung Choi, and Bohyung Han. Fifo-diffusion: Generating infinite videos from text without training. Advances in Neural Information Processing Sys-tems , 37:89834–89868, 2024. 2 [19] Dacheng Li, Yunhao Fang, Yukang Chen, Shuo Yang, Shiyi Cao, Justin Wong, Michael Luo, Xiaolong Wang, Hongxu Yin, Joseph E Gonzalez, et al. Worldmodelbench: Judging video generation models as world models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.20694 , 2025. 2 

10 [20] Zongjian Li, Bin Lin, Yang Ye, Liuhan Chen, Xinhua Cheng, Shenghai Yuan, and Li Yuan. Wf-vae: Enhancing video vae by wavelet-driven energy flow for latent video diffusion model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.17459 , 2024. 2, 6 [21] Zhimin Li, Jianwei Zhang, Qin Lin, Jiangfeng Xiong, Yanxin Long, Xinchi Deng, Yingfang Zhang, Xingchao Liu, Min-bin Huang, Zedong Xiao, et al. Hunyuan-dit: A powerful multi-resolution diffusion transformer with fine-grained chi-nese understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.08748 , 2024. 2[22] Ruotong Liao, Max Erler, Huiyu Wang, Guangyao Zhai, Gengyuan Zhang, Yunpu Ma, and Volker Tresp. Videoinsta: Zero-shot long video understanding via informative spatial-temporal reasoning with llms. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2024 , pages 6577– 6602, 2024. 2 [23] Ruotong Liao, Xu Jia, Yangzhe Li, Yunpu Ma, and Volker Tresp. Gentkg: Generative forecasting on temporal knowl-edge graph with large language models. In Findings of the as-sociation for computational linguistics: NAACL 2024 , pages 4303–4317, 2024. 2 [24] Ruotong Liao, Guowen Huang, Qing Cheng, Thomas Seidl, Daniel Cremers, and Volker Tresp. When and where do events switch in multi-event video generation?, 2025. 2, 9 [25] Bin Lin, Yunyang Ge, Xinhua Cheng, Zongjian Li, Bin Zhu, Shaodong Wang, Xianyi He, Yang Ye, Shenghai Yuan, Li-uhan Chen, et al. Open-sora plan: Open-source large video generation model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.00131 , 2024. 2, 6 [26] Zhiheng Liu, Xueqing Deng, Shoufa Chen, Angtian Wang, Qiushan Guo, Mingfei Han, Zeyue Xue, Mengzhao Chen, Ping Luo, and Linjie Yang. Worldweaver: Generating long-horizon video worlds via rich perception. arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.15720 , 2025. 2 [27] Charlie Nash and Christopher KI Williams. The shape variational autoencoder: A deep generative model of part-segmented 3d objects. In Computer Graphics Forum , pages 1–12. Wiley Online Library, 2017. 2 [28] Gyeongrok Oh, Jaehwan Jeong, Sieun Kim, Wonmin Byeon, Jinkyu Kim, Sungwoong Kim, and Sangpil Kim. Mevg: Multi-event video generation with text-to-video models. In 

European Conference on Computer Vision , pages 401–418. Springer, 2024. 2, 3, 6 [29] Maxime Oquab, Timoth´ ee Darcet, Th´ eo Moutakanni, Huy Vo, Marc Szafraniec, Vasil Khalidov, Pierre Fernandez, Daniel Haziza, Francisco Massa, Alaaeldin El-Nouby, Mah-moud Assran, Nicolas Ballas, Wojciech Galuba, Russell Howes, Po-Yao Huang, Shang-Wen Li, Ishan Misra, Michael Rabbat, Vasu Sharma, Gabriel Synnaeve, Hu Xu, Herv´ e Je-gou, Julien Mairal, Patrick Labatut, Armand Joulin, and Piotr Bojanowski. Dinov2: Learning robust visual features without supervision, 2024. 7 [30] William Peebles and Saining Xie. Scalable diffusion models with transformers, 2023. 1, 2 [31] Adam Polyak, Amit Zohar, Andrew Brown, Andros Tjandra, Animesh Sinha, Ann Lee, Apoorv Vyas, Bowen Shi, Chih-Yao Ma, Ching-Yao Chuang, et al. Movie gen: A cast of media foundation models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.13720 ,2024. 2 [32] Tianhao Qi, Jianlong Yuan, Wanquan Feng, Shancheng Fang, Jiawei Liu, SiYu Zhou, Qian He, Hongtao Xie, and Yongdong Zhang. Maskˆ 2dit: Dual mask-based diffusion transformer for multi-scene long video generation. In Proceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference , pages 18837–18846, 2025. 3 [33] Tianhao Qi, Jianlong Yuan, Wanquan Feng, Shancheng Fang, Jiawei Liu, SiYu Zhou, Qian He, Hongtao Xie, and Yongdong Zhang. Mask 2dit: Dual mask-based diffusion transformer for multi-scene long video generation, 2025. 2, 3 [34] Haonan Qiu, Menghan Xia, Yong Zhang, Yingqing He, Xin-tao Wang, Ying Shan, and Ziwei Liu. Freenoise: Tuning-free longer video diffusion via noise rescheduling, 2024. 2, 6 [35] Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, Gretchen Krueger, and Ilya Sutskever. Learning transferable visual models from natural language supervision, 2021. 7 [36] Nikhila Ravi, Valentin Gabeur, Yuan-Ting Hu, Ronghang Hu, Chaitanya Ryali, Tengyu Ma, Haitham Khedr, Roman R¨ adle, Chloe Rolland, Laura Gustafson, Eric Mintun, Junting Pan, Kalyan Vasudev Alwala, Nicolas Carion, Chao-Yuan Wu, Ross Girshick, Piotr Doll´ ar, and Christoph Feichtenhofer. Sam 2: Segment anything in images and videos, 2024. 7 [37] Nils Reimers and Iryna Gurevych. Sentence-bert: Sentence embeddings using siamese bert-networks. In Proceedings of the 2019 conference on empirical methods in natural lan-guage processing and the 9th international joint conference on natural language processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP) , pages 3982–3992, 2019. 7 [38] Xingwu Sun, Yanfeng Chen, Yiqing Huang, Ruobing Xie, Jiaqi Zhu, Kai Zhang, Shuaipeng Li, Zhen Yang, Jonny Han, Xiaobo Shu, et al. Hunyuan-large: An open-source moe model with 52 billion activated parameters by tencent. arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.02265 , 2024. 2 [39] Genmo Team. Mochi 1. https://github.com/ genmoai/models , 2024. 2 [40] Volker Tresp, Sahand Sharifzadeh, Hang Li, Dario Konopatzki, and Yunpu Ma. The tensor brain: A unified theory of perception, memory, and semantic decoding. Neu-ral Computation , 35(2):156–227, 2023. 1 [41] Wan-AI. Wan: Open and advanced large-scale video gener-ative models. 2025. 6 [42] Fu-Yun Wang, Wenshuo Chen, Guanglu Song, Han-Jia Ye, Yu Liu, and Hongsheng Li. Gen-l-video: Multi-text to long video generation via temporal co-denoising. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.18264 , 2023. 2 [43] Fu-Yun Wang, Wenshuo Chen, Guanglu Song, Han-Jia Ye, Yu Liu, and Hongsheng Li. Gen-l-video: Multi-text to long video generation via temporal co-denoising, 2023. 2 [44] Yi Wang, Yinan He, Yizhuo Li, Kunchang Li, Jiashuo Yu, Xin Ma, Xinhao Li, Guo Chen, Xinyuan Chen, Yaohui Wang, Conghui He, Ping Luo, Ziwei Liu, Yali Wang, Limin Wang, and Yu Qiao. Internvid: A large-scale video-text dataset for multimodal understanding and generation, 2024. 7 

11 [45] Ziyi Wu, Aliaksandr Siarohin, Willi Menapace, Ivan Sko-rokhodov, Yuwei Fang, Varnith Chordia, Igor Gilitschenski, and Sergey Tulyakov. Mind the time: Temporally-controlled multi-event video generation. In Proceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference , pages 23989– 24000, 2025. 2, 6 [46] Zhen Xing, Qijun Feng, Haoran Chen, Qi Dai, Han Hu, Hang Xu, Zuxuan Wu, and Yu-Gang Jiang. A survey on video diffusion models, 2024. 1 [47] Fei Yang, Shiqi Yang, Muhammad Atif Butt, Joost van de Weijer, et al. Dynamic prompt learning: Addressing cross-attention leakage for text-based image editing. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 36:26291–26303, 2023. 2, 3 [48] Zhuoyi Yang, Jiayan Teng, Wendi Zheng, Ming Ding, Shiyu Huang, Jiazheng Xu, Yuanming Yang, Wenyi Hong, Xiao-han Zhang, Guanyu Feng, et al. Cogvideox: Text-to-video diffusion models with an expert transformer. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.06072 , 2024. 1, 2 [49] Zhuoran Yang, Xi Guo, Chenjing Ding, Chiyu Wang, Wei Wu, and Yanyong Zhang. Instadrive: Instance-aware driving world models for realistic and consistent video generation. In 

Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision , pages 25410–25420, 2025. 2 [50] Fan Zhang, Shulin Tian, Ziqi Huang, Yu Qiao, and Ziwei Liu. Evaluation agent: Efficient and promptable evalua-tion framework for visual generative models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.09645 , 2024. 3, 1 [51] Hongyu Zhang, Yufan Deng, Shenghai Yuan, Peng Jin, Zesen Cheng, Yian Zhao, Chang Liu, and Jie Chen. Magiccomp: Training-free dual-phase refinement for compositional video generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.14428 , 2025. 3 [52] Dian Zheng, Ziqi Huang, Hongbo Liu, Kai Zou, Yinan He, Fan Zhang, Lulu Gu, Yuanhan Zhang, Jingwen He, Wei-Shi Zheng, Yu Qiao, and Ziwei Liu. Vbench-2.0: Advancing video generation benchmark suite for intrinsic faithfulness, 2025. 1 [53] Dian Zheng, Ziqi Huang, Hongbo Liu, Kai Zou, Yinan He, Fan Zhang, Lulu Gu, Yuanhan Zhang, Jingwen He, Wei-Shi Zheng, et al. Vbench-2.0: Advancing video generation benchmark suite for intrinsic faithfulness. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.21755 , 2025. 3, 1 

12 TunerDiT: Training-free Progressive Steering of Diffusion Transformer for Consistent Multi-Event Video Generation 

# Supplementary Material 

## A. Meve : Benchmark Construction Details. 

Existing Multi Prompt Benchmarks We compare alarge body of recent work focusing on building general-purpose video generation benchmarks as shown in Figure 3b. VBench [12] decomposes “video generation quality” into 16 hierarchical dimensions. VBench++ [14] further extends this line by supporting image-to-video settings by introducing an image suite. VBench-2.0 [52] shifts the fo-cus from superficial visual plausibility to intrinsic faith-fulness. These benchmarks are invaluable for diagnosing 

overall model quality in a single semantic unit. For multi-prompt video generation, ShotAdapter [17] uses a general ChatGPT curated dataset, which lacks dis-cussion for different prompt types. DiTCtrl [3] introduces MPVBench, a dedicated benchmark for evaluating multi-prompt transitions with ten transition types [3] and rep-resents an important first step toward benchmarking multi-prompt video generation. However, MPVBench primarily focuses on evaluating the transition effects between two sim-ilar scenes that don’t differ significantly in motion content. It deliberately avoids logical sequential prompts; hence, this benchmark is not generalizable to real-world scenar-ios where temporal and logical events occur. We follow the definition of a single event unit that consists of four basic components, i.e., subject, predicate, objects, and time [40] ,and prior benchmarks do not explicitly address this defi-nition and have a mixture of multi-scene with multi-event settings, such as WorldScore [9], which misses the basic four components for an event. 

Motivation and Meve Construction Details In contrast, our goal with MEve is to provide a targeted benchmark for multi-event video generation, built from three comple-mentary sources: (1) conventional LLM-generated prompts tailored to multi-event stories; (2) multi-event variants of existing general video benchmarks (e.g., VBench 2.0 [53]) obtained by transforming single-scene prompts into multi-event counterparts; and (3) real-world event sequences de-rived from egocentric videos with natural-language narra-tions, which supply temporally and logically coherent event chains, further supported by paired ego–exo views. Besides, all categories are carefully organized into 2-, 3-, and 4-event prompt settings with explicit event segmentation and order-ing, with extensibility to more. This design makes MEve 

novel and complementary to previous benchmarks. Specif-ically, we construct MEve as follows: 

LLM as data synthesizer Following prior settings in [17], we use Gemini 2.5 Pro [8] as a controlled prompt generator and author 60 event narratives (e.g., “ event 1 then event 2

then . . . ”). The prompts target the General domain and are written to avoid specific scene priors or content biases. 

Prompts of diagnostic content To inherit general eval-uation while disentangle how subject and action factors shape multi-event generation, we adapt VBench 2.0 cat-egories [50, 53] that are critical in multi-event settings. Specifically, we convert prompts from categories Motion Order Understanding , Human Identity , and Complex Plot 

into four sequential events per prompt while preserving each category’s diagnostic intent. 

Prompts of real-world reference To maintain real-world temporal and logical coherence between events and isolate the effect of viewpoint on event controllability, we con-struct paired egocentric and exocentric variants of prompts from video narrations from Ego–Exo4D [10]. For view-point control, each prompt is prepended with one of two textual formats: (a) Egocentric: Add the prefix “Generate a first-person view video...”, where the original subject 𝐶 is rephrased as “the camera wearer”. (2) Third-person: Add the prefix “Generate a third-person view video...”, denoting an external viewpoint, where the original subject 𝐶 is trans-formed into “the person”. This process results in 50 pairs of prompts, yielding in total 100 prompts. 

## B. Implementation Details 

Under the restriction of the same GPU resource, the num-ber of frames of videos in different event counts and the resolution of the generated videos are shown in Table 2.  

> Table 2. Number of frames of different event count and frame resolution

Model Name #2 #3 #4 Resolution 

Open-Sora 1.2 173 201 205 1280 ×720 Open-Sora 2.0 204 204 204 256 ×256 Wan2.2 97 97 97 1280 ×720 MEVG 32 48 64 256 ×256 DiTCtrl 97 145 193 720 × 480 FreeNoise 192 192 192 256 × 256 1Event Partitioned Mask OpenSora 1.2 employs ST-DiT with separate temporal and spatial blocks for self-attention and a shared cross-attention layer between text embedding and video embedding. OpenSora 2.0 utilizes a dual-stream DiT architecture that concatenates text and video embed-dings before a unified self-attention. This self-attention on the new embedding incorporates cross-attention, video self-attention, and text self-attention simultaneously. For ST-DiT in OpenSora 1.2, the Event Partitioned Mask is applied ex-clusively to the temporal blocks. For dual-stream DiT in OpenSora 2.0, the Event Partitioned Diagonal Mask oper-ates on both blocks. 

Turning points and onset steps. The Event Partitioned Mask is not adopted in previous 𝜏 denoising steps, and is adopted only in the remaining denoising steps. For TunerDiT Open-Sora 1.2, the turning point 𝑥 = 0.1 and 

𝜏 EM = ⌊0.1 × 𝑁 ⌋. For TunerDiT Open-Sora 2.0 and Wan 2.2, 𝑥 = 0.2 and 𝜏 EM = ⌊0.2 × 𝑁 ⌋.

Text embedding partitioning. Event prompts are embed-ded separately and concatenated together to enable proper event segmentation and ordering through the Event Parti-tioned Mask. To maintain consistent positional embeddings, text embeddings are zero-padded to the maximum sequence length. 

Inter and inner event bandwidths. Consider a prompt composed of 𝐸 distinct events. Given a video with 𝐹 𝑙 latent frames in total, a video segment of 𝐹 𝑙 /𝐸 latent frames is allocated to each event. Let 𝑟 represent the band size ratio for band size ratio, the corresponding transition bandwidth is calculated as 𝐻 inter = 𝑊 inter = 𝑟 𝐹 𝑙  

> 𝐸

. This mask is applied in TunerDiT Open-Sora 1.2 with 𝛽 = 0.1 and TunerDiT Open-Sora 2.0 and Wan 2.2 with 𝛽 = 0.2. 

Cross Event Prompt Fusion For TunerDiT Open-Sora 1.2 and TunerDiT Open-Sora 2.0, the ⌊𝜏 fuse on = 0.1 × 𝑁 ⌋,where 𝑁 is the total number of denoising steps. 

## C. Human Evaluation 

Evaluation Details Following human evaluation settings in [2], to ensure a comprehensive evaluation, we selected samples with three distinct event counts of 2, 3, and 4 from six different datasets, for a total of 18 prompts. For each prompt, we choose one sample across 8 models, yield-ing a total of 8 × 3 × 6 = 144 videos for human assess-ment. As shown in our interface Figure 10. All models are anonymized and randomly shuffled. Participants are asked to rate the following four metrics on a 5-point Likert scale, where 1 indicates the lowest satisfaction and 5 indicates the highest, for each video : 1. Overall Preference: Please rate your overall preference for the video. 

> Figure 10. Interface of annotating multi-event generation quality.

2. Motion Naturalness: How natural and realistic is the motion in the video? 

3. Transition Smoothness: How smoothly does the video content transition across different frames? 

4. Text-Video Alignment: To what extent does the video content match the given text descriptions? 

Evaluation Results The quantitative results, derived from evaluations by 14 participants with mimum degree in bachlors, are presented in Table 1b. TunerDiT achieves superior Text-Video Alignment scores compared to the base-line models, including open-source base models and zero-shot methods MEVG, DiTCtrl and FreeNoise. Furthermore, TunerDiT exhibits strong improvement over its base models with high performance gains across all questions, validating the overall acceptance by human evaluators. 2D. Discussion on Metrics 

TA and TIS: Frame-wise and Shot-wise But base mod-els that by default generate fuse events blending backgrounds and subjects from multiple events across the entire video can obtain spuriously high Text alignment (TA) and text–image similarity (TIS) scores, due to each frame representation be-ing conditioned on all events rather than cleanly separated event-specific content. Therefore, it is necessary to empha-size both metrics: TA, which is computed with ViCLIP on a shot-wise alignment, and TIS, which is computed with frame-wise alignment. This explains the fact that our model has greater improvement over TA. 

BC, IC, and CSCV: Consistency Metric Hacking These default settings that models could not distinguish events in generation influence the BC, IC, and CSCV scores severely. Fusing every cue in the prompts on every frame, regard-less of the temporal event order, will lead to the highest consistency score, while breaking generation into event seg-ments inevitably lowers it, although more semantically cor-rect multi-event videos are generated and aligned to hu-man evaluation. We define this phenomenon as Consistency Hacking , that blending, or generally static backgrounds and subjects, increases CSCV due to minimal inter-frame change as well as BC and IC due to unchanged appearance, even though the video fails at multi-event separation. Metric hacking is further exacerbated by methods that can separate events without deliberately noticing this. For example, Mask2DiT[33], although generating events sep-arately, generates backgrounds and subjects that remain largely static in each event. This further indicates that BC, IC, and CSCV scores do not necessarily decrease for ideal multi-event videos. 

Tradeoff between Alignment and Consistency . Given the ablation study in Figure 6, 7, the incorporation of Prompt Fusion facilitates smoother motion dynamics during event transitions within the video. However, it does not necessarily improve TA scores, since frames sampled from transition segments between consecutive events align semantically less to both the preceding and the subsequent event, thereby it trades alignment with consistency. 

## E. More Qualitative Analysis 

As shown in Figure 11, we visualize the event gener-ation conditioned on distinct turning point values 𝑥 of the Event Partitioned Mask (EM) over a fixed grid X =

{0, 0.1, 0.2, . . . , 0.7}.Events begin to merge when 𝑥 > 0.3 in the generated videos, reflecting the plateau effect in Figure 3d. This observation empirically confirms the finding that influence transitions of 

> Figure 11. Visualization of generated frames as the Event Parti-tioned Mask ratio increases from 0 .0 to 0 .7.
> Figure 12. Investigation on dataset categories. Notion: GE (gen-eral prompts), HI (human identity), MO (motion order), CP (com-plex plots), and view splits (1st, 3rd).

text conditions occur at approximately 30% of the denois-ing steps in DiT models. When the Event Partitioned Mask doesn’t provide enough event segmentation information be-cause of too high 𝑥 , multiple events merge indistinguishably, and gradually deteriorate the performance back to the orig-inal base model. 

## F. Additional Discussions 

Investigation on Dataset Categories We compare zero-shot methods with our TunerDiT on Open-Sora 1.2 and Open-Sora 2.0 as shown in Fig. 12. TunerDiT ranks first on nearly all bars in BC and CSCV and shows consistent gains in TIS. IC and BC see the largest gains. Event-partitioned masking preserves per-event identity while prompt fusion stabilizes late-stage detail, yielding higher person and back-3ground consistency. For motion order (MO) , TIS increases, but BC/IC gains are moderate, which is consistent with the fact that MO stresses temporal ordering more than appear-ance persistence. From viewpoint control Generation from both views benefits from TunerDiT. 1st-person videos show marked IC improvements due to consistent hands and ob-jects, while 3rd-view shows strong BC and CSCV due to more stable backgrounds. 

Implications and guidance. (1) The largest gains occur in HI and CP, where boundary control and scene-conditioned bands are most critical; (2) For MO-heavy prompts, later-onset prompt fusion is effective, while mask ratio can be reduced to avoid over-isolation; (3) The consistent CSCV advantage indicates that local cross-event bands are suffi-cient for smooth transitions even under camera changes. 

Failure Cases We identify two primary failure modes in TunerDiT: excessive fusion and insufficient fusion . The for-mer yields results resembling the original baseline models, where multiple events become indistinguishable or erro-neously blended into a single sequence. Conversely, the latter leads to semantic discontinuities, such as inconsistent subjects or backgrounds across event boundaries, produc-ing abrupt changes similar to those observed in the Concat baseline.    

> Figure 13. Visualization of failure modes in TunerDiT caused by extreme event fusion settings. The upper two rows demonstrate the effect of excessive fusion , where distinct events collapse into a single, static sequence. Conversely, the lower rows illustrate
> insufficient fusion , resulting in temporal inconsistencies regarding the subject and background across event boundaries.

Limitations and Future Works The current implementa-tion is constrained by the maximum text embedding length of the baseline model architecture. Given a fixed text embed-ding window of 512 tokens currently adopted by Open-Sora 2.0, a prompt describing 𝐸 events implies that each event is allocated an average of only 512  

> 𝐸

tokens. This token num-ber limits the method’s scalability to extremely complex sequences. However, theoretically, assuming better com-putational situations and the rapid development of video diffusion models for long generation, this framework can be applied naturally to longer videos with more distinct events in future due to its steering method that originates from the intrinsic perspectives shared by DiT models. 

## G. VLM Judgement 

VLM-as-a-judge evaluation. Tables 3 and 4 report the category-wise breakdown of Event Isolation (EI) and Text– Video Alignment (TVA) evaluated by a VLM judge. Over-all, TunerDiT Open-Sora 2.0 achieves the strongest aver-age performance on both metrics, with the highest EI score of 0 .572 and the highest TVA score of 1 .533, indicating that it best separates multiple events while maintaining the strongest semantic alignment to the input prompt. On EI, TunerDiT Open-Sora 2.0 performs particularly well in the Complex Plot and ego/exocentric view categories (First , Third ), where it reaches 0 .8, 0 .7, and 0 .7, respec-tively, substantially outperforming all zero-shot baselines. 

TunerDiT Open-Sora 1.2 also shows strong EI on the HI ,

First , and Third categories, suggesting that the proposed steering is especially beneficial when subject identity and viewpoint changes must still preserve event separability. On TVA, the three TunerDiT variants consistently out-perform the zero-shot baselines in average score, confirming that better event isolation does not come at the cost of global prompt alignment. In particular, TunerDiT Open-Sora 2.0 obtains the best or tied-best results in General , HI , and MO ,while TunerDiT Wan2.2 is competitive in the viewpoint-sensitive Third category. These results show that TunerDiT improves both the 

structural correctness of the multi-event setting, as mea-sured by EI, and the semantic faithfulness of the resulting videos, as measured by TVA, across diverse prompt cate-gories. 4Table 3. VLA as judge score on Event Isolation (EI). Evaluating each frame, infer the number of events, then compare with the actual number of events in the prompt. 

Name Average General HI MO CP First Third Zero-shot Methods 

MEVG 0.435 0.315 0.6 0.5 0.7 0.3 0.2 FreeNoise 0.436 0.67 0.44 0.44 0.44 0.375 0.25 DitCtrl 0.375 0.15 0.5 0.2 0.3 0.5 0.6 Maks2DiT 0.108 0.05 0.1 0.0 0.2 0.2 0.1 VideoCrafter2 0.08 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.1 

Ours 

Tuner Wan2.2 0.474 0.4 0.43 0.32 0.5 0.6 0.5 Tuner Open-Sora 1.2 0.499 0.2 0.6 0.3 0.5 0.8 0.6 Tuner Open-Sora 2.0 0.572 0.33 0.5 0.4 0.8 0.7 0.7  

> Table 4. VLA as judge score on Text-Video Alignment (TVA). Evaluating each frame, generating captions, and then comparing the alignment score between the captions and the original video prompt.

Name Average General HI MO CP First Third Zero-shot Methods 

Mask2DiT 1.275 1.95 1.2 1.0 1.3 1.0 1.2 DitCtrl 1.425 2.25 1.5 1.5 1.2 1.1 1.0 MEVG 1.375 1.35 1.8 1.4 1.3 1.0 1.4 Freenoise 1.4 1.8 1.7 1.5 1.0 1.0 1.4 VideoCrafter2 1.183 1.5 1.1 1.2 1.3 1.0 1.0 

Ours 

Tuner Wan2.2 1.503 1.72 1.6 1.8 1.2 1.2 1.5 Tuner Open-Sora 1.2 1.492 1.95 1.5 1.6 1.2 1.3 1.4 Tuner Open-Sora 2.0 1.533 2.1 1.8 1.8 1.0 1.4 1.1 5