Title: Dynamic Infilling Anchors for Format-Constrained Generation in Diffusion Large Language Models

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.04535v1

Published Time: Thu, 04 Jun 2026 00:52:43 GMT

Number of Pages: 15

Markdown Content:
# Dynamic Infilling Anchors for Format-Constrained Generation in Diffusion Large Language Models 

Boyan Han 1 Yiwei Wang 2 Yi Song 3 Yujun Cai 4 Chi Zhang 1*  

> 1AGI Lab, Westlake University, China 2University of California, Merced, USA
> 3Teeni AI, China 4The University of Queensland, Australia https://github.com/Westlake-AGI-Lab/DIA
> boyanhan02@gmail.com

Abstract 

Diffusion large language models (dLLMs) offer bidirectional attention and parallel generation, enabling them to exploit global context and naturally support format-constrained tasks like parseable JSON or reasoning templates. While straightforward fixed anchors can enforce such constraints, they often impose rigid spans, lead-ing to truncated reasoning or redundant content. To overcome this, we propose Dynamic Infill-ing Anchors (DIA), a training-free method that dynamically estimates end-anchor positions to adjust generation length before iterative infill-ing. This flexible mechanism ensures structural correctness and semantic coherence, avoiding the inefficiencies of fixed-span methods. Exper-iments on reasoning benchmarks demonstrate that DIA substantially improves format com-pliance and answer accuracy, achieving signif-icant zero-shot gains on GSM8K and MATH. These results establish DIA as a robust pathway toward reliable, structure-aware generation. 

1 Introduction 

In recent years, diffusion large language models (dLLMs)(Nie et al., 2025; Ye et al., 2025; Labs et al., 2025; Song et al., 2025; Deepmind, 2024) have attracted increasing attention due to their dis-tinctive computational mechanisms and promising potential. Unlike traditional autoregressive lan-guage models (AR LLMs), which rely on left-to-right sequential decoding, dLLMs are not restricted to unidirectional dependencies during generation. Instead, they employ a bidirectional attention mech-anism, enabling the model to update token represen-tations at each step by leveraging complete contex-tual information simultaneously. This mechanism allows all positions in a sequence to be predicted in parallel rather than generated step by step, thereby substantially enhancing both modeling flexibility and computational efficiency. Beyond efficiency 

> *Corresponding author.

gains, this parallelism also strengthens the contex-tual modeling capacity of dLLMs, enabling them to capture global dependencies more comprehen-sively. The fully masked nature of dLLMs offers a unique opportunity to directly incorporate con-straints by editing the initialization sequence. By preemptively replacing specific mask tokens with mandatory content, we can guide the generation toward strictly structured outputs. This motivates our exploration of format-constrained generation (e.g. parseable JSON). We evaluate this capabil-ity on different scenarios: thinking–answering task and JSON generation tasks. On both scenarios ex-isting dLLMs typically fail to achieve satisfactory outcomes. We evaluate this capability on think-ing–answering tasks and a JSON generation task, where existing dLLMs typically fail to achieve sat-isfactory outcomes. To address these challenges, a straightforward approach is to enforce structural constraints by in-serting anchors ( e.g. < think > , < /think > ,

< answer > , < /answer > in reasoning sce-nario.) directly into the masked sequence. How-ever, while this approach appears intuitive, it also introduces new challenges. Once anchor positions are fixed in advance, the generative space between them becomes rigid, forcing the model to allocate tokens within predetermined boundaries. Such rigidity can lead to suboptimal allocation of gener-ative space and ultimately impair output quality. In practice, when the fixed span between anchors is too short, the reasoning process is often truncated before completion. On the other hand, when the span is too long, the model tends to produce redun-dant or repetitive content, thereby reducing both efficiency and reliability. To obtain an appropriate generation length be-tween anchors, thereby ensuring format correctness while maintaining generation quality, we propose a more flexible training-free strategy termed Dy-

> arXiv:2606.04535v1 [cs.CL] 3 Jun 2026 Figure 1: Dynamic Infilling Anchors (DIA). (a) Fixed-position infilling baseline. (b) Overview about our methods: DIA. (c) Details of expansion and anchor infilling steps with truncation and remasking.

namic Infilling Anchors (DIA) . Our approach is inspired by previous studies on dLLMs(Li et al., 2025), which demonstrates that the model can esti-mate the position of the end token with only one or a few prediction steps, thereby determining a suit-able generation length. We extend this capability to predict the proper positions of anchors before con-tent generation. Specifically, our method consists of two stages: (1) generation length adjustment by estimating position of the end anchor, and (2) iterative generation between fixed anchors. The first stage of our method involves adjusting the generation space by estimating the position of the end anchor. Following the user prompt, the model initializes a relatively short, fully masked sequence, which serves as a starting point for the task output length and is dynamically extended later. For a think-answer task, this masked se-quence is evenly divided into two blocks, with the corresponding begin anchors inserted at the start of each block. We then determine the anchor po-sitions sequentially, one block at a time. Within each block, the model performs a single prediction step on the sequence, which is prefilled with the begin anchor. If the prediction fails to produce an end anchor or yields one with insufficient confi-dence, it suggests that the current generation length is inadequate. Therefore, we extend the block by appending additional masked tokens to ensure ade-quate space for content generation and repeat the prediction step. This extension continues until the model successfully produces a valid end anchor or the block length reaches its upper limit. The design of Stage I fully leverages the model’s awareness of the generation space; it guarantees sufficient allo-cation for each phase while minimizing redundant space and unnecessary computation. The second stage performs iterative generation after anchors are fixed. In the previous stage, we obtained a reasonable generation length and fixed the position of the end anchor. Based on this setup, we now generate the intermediate content between the anchors. This step effectively compensates for the limitations of single-step prediction and helps the model establish clear semantic bound-aries across different segments, thereby promoting coherent content generation. We validate the effectiveness of DIA on reasoning-oriented benchmarks and JSON gen-eration benchmark. Experimental results on GSM8K(Cobbe et al., 2021) (0-shot) and MATH(Hendrycks et al., 2021) (0-shot) show that our method improves format correctness from 58.83% and 29.10% to 72.63% and 76.82% , re-spectively. Moreover, by better controlling the generation space, our method significantly im-proves answer accuracy on GSM8K from 14.86% to 46.78% , while maintaining a comparable level on MATH (20.08% vs. 21.52%). Furthermore, our approach demonstrates exceptional stability on the Wikibio(Lebret et al., 2016) dataset, achieving a valid JSON generation rate of 79.84% across vari-ous answer extraction methods, with a mere 0.15% 

of these valid JSON samples exhibiting halluci-nated content. These results demonstrate that DIA substantially enhances both the reliability and qual-ity of format-constrained generation with dLLMs. In summary, our contributions are three-fold: 1. We introduce a novel dLLM-based strategy for format-constrained generation. 2. We design a dynamic adjustment mechanism that flexibly allocates generative space, miti-gating the rigidity of fixed-anchor methods. 3. We will release code and resources to foster reproducibility and further research in this emerging area. 

2 Related Works 

Diffusion Large Language Models The evolu-tion of diffusion in language modeling originates from masked language models(Devlin et al., 2019), which established the basis for denoising-based generation. While early continuous-space diffu-sion models(Jo and Hwang, 2025) explored latent mappings, they suffered from decoding instability. Consequently, discrete-space models(Austin et al., 2023) were proposed to model diffusion directly at the token level, with subsequent improvements like BlockDiffusion(Arriola et al., 2025) enhancing generation efficiency. For scaling, current dLLMs typically initialize from pretrained autoregressive models(Gong et al., 2025a; Ye et al., 2025) fol-lowed by instruction alignment(Yang et al., 2025b; You et al., 2025; Song et al., 2025). Recently, researchers have further integrated reinforcement learning(Wang et al., 2025; Zhao et al., 2025; Gong et al., 2025b) to bolster advanced capabil-ities, alongside extending dLLMs to multimodal scenarios. 

Format-Constraints Format-constrained gen-eration is critical for deploying language models, as it directly affects the parseability and reliabil-ity of code generation, structured outputs, and reasoning templates. Existing studies often con-strain the input side (prompt design(Ye et al., 2024) and example-based guidance(Min et al., 2022)), yet they are unstable under long-chain or high-complexity reasoning; output-side repair (post-processing and re-ranking(Gao et al., 2025; Zhuang et al., 2025)) improves format compliance but strug-gles to preserve semantic and structural consistency simultaneously. Fine-tuning or reinforcement learn-ing on task-specific data(Song et al., 2025; Xiong et al., 2023; Cui et al., 2024; Yang et al., 2023) can enhance robustness, but the approach is costly and generalizes poorly across tasks. Constrained de-coding(Mündler et al., 2025; Banerjee et al., 2025) with grammars or finite-state machines enforces strict compliance at the expense of efficiency and flexibility. 

Large Language Models The evolution of LLMs(Yang et al., 2025a; Grattafiori et al., 2024; DeepSeek-AI et al., 2025; Anthropic, 2025; Deep-mind, 2025; xAI, 2025; OpenAI, 2025) is grounded in scaling laws(Kaplan et al., 2020), which guide systematic capability improvements. On this foun-dation, in-context learning (ICL)(Min et al., 2022) has emerged, enabling LLMs to adapt to new tasks without explicit parameter updates. To en-hance usability and human alignment, post-training techniques like fine-tuning(Ouyang et al., 2022) and reinforcement learning(Schulman et al., 2017; Rafailov et al., 2024; Shao et al., 2024) are exten-sively employed. Furthermore, advances in cross-modal alignment(Li et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2023) have extended LLM versatility, allowing effective operation across text, vision, and speech. 

3 Method 

3.1 Preliminary Inference of dLLMs. In the generation stage of a diffusion language model (dLLM), the response se-quence to be refined is initialized by concatenating the input prompt with a fully masked sequence of a specified length: 

xT = [ prompt ; [MASK] ×L], (1) where [·; ·] denotes the concatenation operation, and L represents the maximum target length. The term [MASK] ×L indicates a sequence of mask to-kens repeated L times to align with the target for-mat. The generation process follows a discrete-time masked diffusion procedure, which can be formulated as a Markov chain. Thus, each predic-tion step depends only on the previous state, and in every iteration only the masked positions are updated in parallel: 

P0|t =

> 0

Y

> s=tL−1

Y

> i=0

Ps|s+1 (xis | xs+1 ), (2) 

Ps|s+1 (xis | xs+1 ) = 



1,

if xis+1 ̸ = [M] ,

1 − ˆq, 

if xis+1 = [M] ∧ ˆq < C, 

ˆq, 

otherwise .

(3) where [M] is the mask token, ˆq = max( q(xis)) 

denotes the maximum confidence score, and C is the confidence threshold. 

Fixed-position Infilling To impose structural constraints, Fixed-position Infilling serves as a static baseline that injects pre-defined anchors into the initialization state. Let T = {(k, v k)}Kk=1 de-note a set of K fixed anchors, where k represents the absolute position index in the target sequence and vk is the corresponding token constraint (like 

< think > and < answer > ). In standard diffusion language models, the gen-eration starts from a fully masked sequence xT =[prompt ; [M] ×L]. In Fixed-position Infilling, we modify this initial state by strictly enforcing the token values at specified indices: 

x(i) 

> T

=

(

vi, if ∃(i, v i) ∈ T ,

[M] , otherwise , (4) where x(i) 

> T

denotes the token at position i of the response part. The subsequent reverse diffusion process p(xt−1|xt) is then performed on this par-tially filled sequence. Since the anchor positions are immutable, the model is restricted to generat-ing content only in the remaining masked intervals, which leads to truncation or redundancy. This mo-tivates our dynamic approach described next. 

3.2 Dynamic Infilling Anchor 

To overcome the limited flexibility of straightfor-ward infilling methods in diffusion language mod-els, we propose DIA, a training-free, two-stage approach. DIA selects an appropriate end-anchor position through a single-step prediction, thereby ensuring both format correctness and generation quality. The overview of our method is illustrated in Figure 1. 

3.2.1 Generation length adjustment 

DLLMs implicitly acquire a prior distribution over response termination positions from large-scale training corpora(Li et al., 2025). Specifically, for different input queries, the confidence of predict-ing the eos token at various positions within the answer sequence is not uniform, but instead ex-hibits a trend correlated with the appropriate re-sponse length. Building on this insight, we extend this capability to format-constrained tasks. For a typical reasoning-answer task, when the model re-ceives the start anchor of a reasoning or answering 

Algorithm 1 Dynamic Infilling Anchors (DIA)                                                                                           

> Require: Seq. X={Q, X L}; Anchors B,E
> Require: Threshold c; Step ∆; Max len M
> Ensure: Result X={Q, C 1, . . . , C |B| }
> 1: Divide XLinto blocks C={C1, . . . , C |B| }
> 2: for i←1to |B| do
> 3: Prepend bito Ci
> 4: end for
> 5: Stage 1: Length Adjustment
> 6: for each block Cido
> 7: while True do
> 8: Y←Infer( Q, C 1, . . . , C i)
> 9: Search Yfor match ywith end-anchor ei
> 10: if yexists and Conf( y)> c then
> 11: Truncate Ciat y;break
> 12: else if |Ci|+ ∆ ≤Mthen
> 13: Expand Ciby ∆tokens 14: else
> 15: Stop expansion; break ▷Limit reached 16: end if
> 17: end while
> 18: Stage 2: Iterative Denoising
> 19: Append eito tail of Ci
> 20: Mask & regen. rest of Civia Infer( ·)
> 21: end for
> 22: return X

section, it should be able to anticipate at what se-quence length a corresponding “end-of-reasoning” or “end-of-answering” anchor is likely to occur. Intuitively, if the allocated generation space is suf-ficient to accommodate the reasoning or answering process, the one-step prediction will contain an end anchor (or partial end anchor) with high confidence exceeding a given threshold. Conversely, if the generation space is insufficient, the corresponding anchor will either fail to appear or appear only with substantially reduced confidence. Building on this assumption, we design the generation-space estimation procedure of DIA. Given an input sequence X, which consists of the user query Q and a fully masked sequence XL of a specified length L, DIA divides the sequence into two blocks ( C = {C1, C 2}) of equal size (in terms of masked tokens), corresponding to the reasoning and answering stages. For each block, DIA first pre-fills the start anchor at the beginning of the decodable region. After inserting the start anchor, the block undergoes a one-step prediction. The prediction results and their associated confidence scores are used to determine whether the allocated generation length is appropriate. Since the model is unlikely to produce a complete anchor token se-quence in a single prediction, partial anchors are also incorporated into the decision mechanism. If the prediction either fails to produce an end anchor Figure 2: DIA delivers reliable anchor preservation and stable performance across different benchmarks. Even as task complexity increases on the more challenging MATH, DIA consistently maintains high anchor retention, underscoring its robustness under stricter reasoning and formatting requirements. 

(or a partial end anchor) or yields an end anchor with confidence below the threshold c, the length of current block is expanded by a fixed length ∆,and the “predict–decide” cycle is repeated until the generation space is sufficient to support the model in completing the reasoning or answering process. When multiple positions in the sequence satisfy the confidence threshold simultaneously, we retain the position closest to the left boundary to prevent the generation of duplicate end anchors within the sequence. To avert unbounded expansion, a maxi-mum block length M is imposed. We truncate the redundant tokens following the selected end-anchor position and subsequently complete the partial end anchor to form a full one. 

3.2.2 Iterative Denoising with Infilling 

In Stage I, we establish the block boundaries by determining the positions of the anchors. Based on these fixed semantic boundaries, the model then it-eratively generates the intermediate content within the block. The fixed anchors serve as guidance, ensuring clear separation between segments and thereby promoting coherent content generation. We process the blocks sequentially through two stages. Specifically, once the length of the thinking block is determined, its content is generated; the additional information obtained from this reason-ing step is then used to determine the length of the answering block, which is subsequently generated in an iterative manner. This design maximizes the benefit of the reasoning process by leveraging the information gained in the first stage to enhance the quality of the final answer. Further implementa-tion details are provided in Algorithm 1. Detailed Notation summary could be found in Appendix A. 

4 Experiments 

4.1 Benchmarks 

To systematically evaluate the effectiveness of our method, we adopt two scenarios: reasoning-sensitive scenario and JSON generation scenario. For reasoning-sensitive mathematical benchmarks we selected GSM8K 0-shot and MATH 0-shot. 

GSM8K (Cobbe et al., 2021) is a widely used dataset of grade-school math word problems, cov-ering basic arithmetic and commonsense reasoning tasks, and thus serves as a reliable measure of a model’s performance in everyday numerical rea-soning scenarios. In contrast, MATH (Hendrycks et al., 2021) is a more challenging benchmark that spans competition-level problems from elementary to advanced mathematics, encompassing diverse problem types and difficulty levels, thereby provid-ing a rigorous assessment of a model’s capabilities in complex reasoning and knowledge generaliza-tion. For the JSON generation task, we constructed 10,000 JSON generation instances based on the WikiBio(Lebret et al., 2016) dataset. Specifically, the model is required to generate a JSON output comprising predefined fields based on an input bio-graphical description. 

4.2 Baselines 

We select Dream-7B-Base-v0 and Dream-7B-Instruct-v0 as our baseline models. The Dream-7B series is initialized from the Qwen model family and has achieved superior performance compared to other open-source diffusion models on multiple benchmark tasks. To ensure fairness, all experi-ments are conducted with corresponding modifica-tions to the official codebase, without applying any additional acceleration or optimization techniques. 

4.3 Implementation Details 

Our method is implemented within the PyTorch framework. For a fair comparison, all models are evaluated under the same GPU configuration when tested on identical tasks. Additional implementa-tion details are provided in Appendix B. 

4.4 Main Results 

We conduct a comprehensive evaluation on the three benchmarks. Table 1 reports the comparison between our method and the baselines on reason-ing benchmarks. While Table 2 reports the result on JSON generation task. Specifically, Dream-7B-Base-v0 and Dream-7B-Instruct-v0 generate responses by relying solely on additional format-constrained prompts. In contrast, the infilling ap-proach inserts the corresponding anchors at des-ignated positions within the response sequence of Dream-7B-Base-v0, thereby guiding the model to produce answers. Prompts for our method please refer to Appendix D. To comprehensively evaluate our method across different scenarios, we introduce three metrics: For-mat Score ( Sf ormat ), Accuracy ( Acc. ), and Hallu-cination Score ( SHal ). Specifically, for reasoning tasks, we employ Format Score and Accuracy. Ac-curacy measures whether the generated response contains the correct answer, while Format Score assesses whether the response strictly adheres to the predefined structural constraints. For the JSON generation task, we substitute Accuracy with Hal-lucination Score to evaluate the content quality. Formally, given a test set of N samples, let yi

denote the generated response for the i-th sample. The metrics are defined as: 

Sf ormat = 1

N

> N

X

> i=1

⊮ Vf mt (yi), (5) 

Acc. = 1

N

> N

X

> i=1

⊮ Vans (yi). (6) where ⊮(·) is the indicator function which equals 

1 if the condition is met and 0 otherwise. Vf mt (yi)

represents the condition that yi fully satisfies the format requirements, and Vans (yi) denotes that the extracted answer in yi is correct. For the JSON generation task, the Hallucina-tion Score is calculated exclusively over the sub-set of valid JSON samples. To extract the gen-erated JSON results, we adopt two distinct meth-ods: Regular Expression and Raw Matching. The Regular Expression approach flexibly matches the model-generated content based on predefined rules, thus imposing relatively lenient formatting requirements. In contrast, the Raw Matching method merely strips the “Answer:” prefix from the model’s response prior to format validation, thereby enforcing much stricter formatting con-straints. Let Nvalid = PNi=1 ⊮ Vf mt (yi) be the number of responses that successfully follow the format. The Hallucination Score is formulated as: 

SHal = 1

Nvalid NX

> i=1

⊮ Vf mt (yi) ∧ V Hal (yi), (7) where VHal (yi) indicates the condition that the gen-erated response yi contains hallucinated content. Compared to the performance degradation intro-duced by the infilling approach, DIA achieves su-perior results in both format adherence and answer quality. On GSM8K, DIA not only raises the for-mat score from 58.83% to 72.63% but also substan-tially improves accuracy from 14.86% to 46.78%, highlighting its ability to simultaneously enforce structural fidelity and enhance reasoning correct-ness. On the more challenging MATH bench-mark, DIA boosts the format score from 29.10% to 76.82%, demonstrating remarkable robustness in preserving structural anchors even under com-plex problem settings, while maintaining compa-rable answer accuracy to baseline methods. Fur-thermore, in the WikiBio task, in contrast to the severe failure stemming from the limitations of the infilling approach (which yields a mere 0.01% valid JSON samples), the DIA method exhibits ex-ceptional performance and stability across various 0-shot GSM8K 0-shot MATH-500 

Sf ormat Acc. Sf ormat Acc. 

Dream-7B-Base (Ye et al., 2025) 0.00 68.99 0.00 25.14 Dream-7B-Instruct (Ye et al., 2025) 0.00 15.01 0.00 25.28 Infilling Baseline 58.83 14.86 29.10 21.52 

Dynamic Infilling Anchor (Ours) 72.63 46.78 76.82 20.08 

> Table 1: Comparison of Methods on Format Adherence and Benchmark Performance. DIA achieves the highest format scores across both GSM8K and MATH, substantially outperforming baseline and infilling approaches. These results highlight the robustness and effectiveness of DIA in enforcing strict structural constraints while maintaining competitive answer accuracy.

Regular Expression Raw Matching 

Sf ormat (↑) SHal (↓) Sf ormat (↑) SHal (↓)

Dream-7B-Base (Ye et al., 2025) 40.72 12.35 0.00 -Dream-7B-Instruct (Ye et al., 2025) 66.74 5.10 52.80 4.81 Infilling Baseline 0.01 0.00 0.01 0.00 

Dynamic Infilling Anchor (Ours) 79.84 0.15 79.84 0.15 

> Table 2: Comparison of Methods on the JSON Generation Task(Wikibio). DIA achieves the highest format score and the lowest hallucination score across both Regular Expression and Raw Matching extraction methods, substantially outperforming all baselines.

answer extraction methods. Specifically, whether employing regular expression extraction or directly utilizing the raw answer, DIA achieves an impres-sive valid JSON rate of 79.84%, accompanied by a remarkably low hallucination score of 0.15%. The results clearly demonstrate that DIA addresses the shortcomings of baseline models and methods under format-constrained tasks, ensuring accurate preservation of the required format. Moreover, un-like the infilling approach, DIA’s flexible design of generation length allows each stage to maintain high answer quality, thereby achieving a better bal-ance between performance and format correctness across diverse benchmarks. Figure 2 presents a detailed comparison of an-chor retention ratios across different methods on reasoning benchmarks. Overall, DIA demon-strates outstanding stability on both GSM8K and MATH, consistently achieving nearly 100% reten-tion across all four anchors, including both be-gin anchor ( < think > and < answer > ) and end anchor ( < /think > and < /answer > ). This robust performance shows that the proposed two-stage generation strategy not only preserves anchors under varying conditions but also en-forces strict compliance with the predefined format throughout the entire sequence. Such stability is particularly important in reasoning-oriented tasks, where structural deviations can lead to incomplete, unparseable, or misleading outputs. In contrast, the Base and SFT models suffer from significant structural degradation. For example, on GSM8K, their retention rates for < /think >

collapse to only 4.4% and 29.5%, respectively, and on MATH, the rates for < /think > and 

< /answer > drop to single digits. These results reveal a consistent failure of conventional methods to maintain boundary integrity, especially in longer or more complex reasoning chains, where models tend to lose track of global structure and generate unbalanced outputs. Such issues undermine the reliability of the generated content and illustrate why relying solely on prompt-based constraints or fine-tuning strategies is insufficient for strict format adherence. Although the Infilling baseline achieves higher anchor retention than Base and SFT, nearly match-ing DIA on GSM8K for < think > and <answer > , its performance on begin anchors re-mains unstable. Crucially, this preservation does not translate into gains in overall format correctness or answer accuracy. For instance, while Infilling retains anchors on GSM8K, its downstream results remain far below DIA in both structural and se-Figure 3: Top-5 statistics of out-of-anchor content generated by baseline models across different benchmarks. The baseline models fail to establish effective semantic boundaries aligned with anchor positions, leading to unconstrained content generation. 

mantic evaluations. This mismatch highlights that simply inserting anchors is not enough; without a dynamic mechanism for allocating and regulat-ing generation space, models either over-generate redundant tokens or fail to stop at the correct bound-aries. Taken together, these results provide a fine-grained validation of Table 1 and Table 2. They show that DIA not only outperforms existing ap-proaches in aggregate metrics but also secures over-whelming superiority in preserving critical anchors across diverse datasets. By ensuring that every anchor is faithfully retained, DIA substantially en-hances the reliability of format-constrained gener-ation, laying a foundation for robust application of dLLMs in reasoning, structured reporting, and other scenarios where strict adherence to format is essential. 

4.5 Analysis Experiments 4.5.1 Behavior Outside Anchor Contexts 

To more comprehensively evaluate model perfor-mance under format-constrained tasks, we con-ducted a statistical analysis of the responses generated by Dream-7B-Base-v0 and Dream-7B-Instruct-v0 on reasoning benchmarks. Our anal-ysis focuses on the content appearing beyond the 

< /answer > anchor boundary, as this indicates whether the models can effectively leverage the se-mantic boundaries established by anchors to prop-erly constrain their generation. Specifically, we examined all responses across the two benchmarks and extracted the Top-5 most frequent continua-tions occurring after the < /answer > boundary for both models, with the results shown in Figure 3. This analysis provides a fine-grained perspec-tive on boundary robustness, complementing ag-gregate metrics by revealing how models behave when the intended termination point has already been reached. As shown in Figure 3, Dream-7B-Base-v0 pro-duces dispersed and low-frequency redundancy be-yond the < /answer > anchor, with all Top-5 patterns below 6%, whereas Dream-7B-Instruct-v0 exhibits more concentrated redundancy, with Top-5 patterns reaching up to 17.3% and dominated by re-peated < think > tokens. The contrast highlights that the Base model tends toward uncontrolled drift-ing, while the Instruct variant systematically re-enters the reasoning phase, reflecting a structural weakness in anchor boundary enforcement. Over-all, the Base model lacks effective boundary con-trol, while the instruct model suffers from patterned continuations, and both fail to reliably terminate at the anchor, underscoring the necessity of DIA in eliminating out-of-anchor redundancy and ensur-ing format adherence. Importantly, such failures not only compromise readability but also propa-gate errors to downstream applications that rely on strictly bounded outputs. 

4.5.2 Expand times 

To establish a reasonable upper bound for the max-imum block length, we analyzed the number of ex-tensions in the reasoning part of all format-correct responses. The details are presented in Figure 4. The results show that the chosen maximum length threshold effectively ensures the allocation of ap-Figure 4: Statistics of effectively expanded samples. The maximum length threshold ensures that the vast majority of cases receive an appropriate number of ex-pansions, thereby safeguarding answer quality. 

propriate generation space. Specifically, the ob-served extension counts fall within the range of (30, 85), which is substantially smaller than the number of extensions permitted by the maximum threshold. In other words, although a large upper bound is allowed, the vast majority of responses naturally converge to a much smaller range of expansions, confirming that the setting of the maximum block length is both sufficient and not overly restrictive. Moreover, the proportion of format-correct re-sponses within this range consistently exceeds 90%, further validating both the effectiveness of our method and the appropriateness of the cur-rent threshold setting. Importantly, this trend is observed across both GSM8K and MATH, where over 94% of samples fall into the effective expan-sion range, indicating that DIA adapts reliably to tasks of different scales and difficulties. Such sta-bility suggests that the block-length constraint not only prevents degenerate over-expansion but also preserves high-quality structural adherence across benchmarks. GSM8K MATH Average Latency Average Latency Base 10.72 31.71 Instruct 10.70 31.64 Infilling 10.67 31.54 DIA 26.52 30.62 

> Table 3: Average Latency of DIA in reasoning tasks. On MATH, DIA achieves lower latency than all baselines owing to Stage I’s upfront length planning

4.5.3 Average Latency 

We report the average latency statistics in Table 3. Surprisingly, DIA achieves lower latency than baselines on the complex MATH dataset. This effi-ciency stems from our variable-length mechanism (Stage 1), which rationally plans sequence length upfront to avoid redundant computation and reduce delay. 

5 Conclusion 

In this work, we introduced Dynamic Infilling An-chors (DIA), a training-free framework for format-constrained generation in dLLMs. By employ-ing a two-stage strategy, predicting anchor posi-tions to guide length expansion before content gen-eration, DIA achieves a strong balance between structural fidelity and semantic quality. Experi-ments on GSM8K, MATH and Wikibio confirm that DIA substantially improves format adherence while maintaining competitive accuracy, demon-strating that diffusion models can effectively over-come template rigidity without sacrificing reason-ing depth. Beyond empirical gains, our study highlights the intrinsic potential of dLLMs to handle strict constraints, such as code or proofs, without ad-ditional training. Future directions include ex-ploring automated anchor design and hierarchical constraints. By bridging structural control and se-mantic consistency, DIA lays the groundwork for deploying dLLMs as dependable, structure-aware models in real-world applications where reliability is paramount. 

6 Discussions 

Our results highlight a fundamental advantage of diffusion large language models (dLLMs) over tra-ditional autoregressive (AR) models in structure-aware tasks. While AR models often struggle with strict templates due to their strict left-to-right de-coding nature, DIA demonstrates that dLLMs can naturally decouple sequence length planning from content generation. This shifts the paradigm of for-mat control from post-hoc filtering or constrained decoding to intrinsic generation planning, paving the way for more flexible and reliable text genera-tion architectures. 

7 Acknowledgement 

This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 6250070674) and the Zhejiang Leading Innova-tive and Entrepreneur Team Introduction Program (2024R01007). Limitations 

Despite its effectiveness, DIA faces several limita-tions. First, the method relies on manually speci-fied anchors with fixed semantic roles, which re-stricts its adaptability to tasks where structural boundaries shift dynamically ( e.g. , open-domain dialogue). Second, the iterative length adjustment introduces modest inference overhead, potentially hindering deployment in strictly real-time systems. We are fully aware of the boundaries of our current evaluation and hope that our work will inspire the community to explore anchor-based control in a broader range of multimodal and creative tasks. 

References 

Anthropic. 2025. Introducing claude 4. Marianne Arriola, Aaron Gokaslan, Justin T. Chiu, Zhi-han Yang, Zhixuan Qi, Jiaqi Han, Subham Sekhar Sahoo, and Volodymyr Kuleshov. 2025. Block diffu-sion: Interpolating between autoregressive and diffu-sion language models. Preprint , arXiv:2503.09573. Jacob Austin, Daniel D. Johnson, Jonathan Ho, Daniel Tarlow, and Rianne van den Berg. 2023. Structured denoising diffusion models in discrete state-spaces. 

Preprint , arXiv:2107.03006. Debangshu Banerjee, Tarun Suresh, Shubham Ugare, Sasa Misailovic, and Gagandeep Singh. 2025. Crane: Reasoning with constrained llm generation. Preprint ,arXiv:2502.09061. Karl Cobbe, Vineet Kosaraju, Mohammad Bavarian, Mark Chen, Heewoo Jun, Lukasz Kaiser, Matthias Plappert, Jerry Tworek, Jacob Hilton, Reiichiro Nakano, Christopher Hesse, and John Schulman. 2021. Training verifiers to solve math word prob-lems. Preprint , arXiv:2110.14168. Jiaxi Cui, Munan Ning, Zongjian Li, Bohua Chen, Yang Yan, Hao Li, Bin Ling, Yonghong Tian, and Li Yuan. 2024. Chatlaw: A multi-agent collabora-tive legal assistant with knowledge graph enhanced mixture-of-experts large language model. Preprint ,arXiv:2306.16092. Google Deepmind. 2024. Gemini diffusion: Our state-of-the-art, experimental text diffusion model. Google Deepmind. 2025. Gemini 2.5: Our most intelli-gent ai model. DeepSeek-AI, Aixin Liu, Bei Feng, Bing Xue, Bingx-uan Wang, Bochao Wu, Chengda Lu, Chenggang Zhao, Chengqi Deng, Chenyu Zhang, Chong Ruan, Damai Dai, Daya Guo, Dejian Yang, Deli Chen, Dongjie Ji, Erhang Li, Fangyun Lin, Fucong Dai, and 181 others. 2025. Deepseek-v3 technical report. 

Preprint , arXiv:2412.19437. Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. 2019. Bert: Pre-training of deep bidirectional transformers for language understand-ing. Preprint , arXiv:1810.04805. Jingtong Gao, Bo Chen, Weiwen Liu, Xiangyang Li, Yichao Wang, Wanyu Wang, Huifeng Guo, Ruim-ing Tang, and Xiangyu Zhao. 2025. Llm4rerank: Llm-based auto-reranking framework for recommen-dations. Preprint , arXiv:2406.12433. Shansan Gong, Shivam Agarwal, Yizhe Zhang, Ji-acheng Ye, Lin Zheng, Mukai Li, Chenxin An, Peilin Zhao, Wei Bi, Jiawei Han, Hao Peng, and Lingpeng Kong. 2025a. Scaling diffusion language models via adaptation from autoregressive models. Preprint ,arXiv:2410.17891. Shansan Gong, Ruixiang Zhang, Huangjie Zheng, Ji-atao Gu, Navdeep Jaitly, Lingpeng Kong, and Yizhe Zhang. 2025b. Diffucoder: Understanding and im-proving masked diffusion models for code generation. 

Preprint , arXiv:2506.20639. Aaron Grattafiori, Abhimanyu Dubey, Abhinav Jauhri, Abhinav Pandey, Abhishek Kadian, Ahmad Al-Dahle, Aiesha Letman, Akhil Mathur, Alan Schel-ten, Alex Vaughan, Amy Yang, Angela Fan, Anirudh Goyal, Anthony Hartshorn, Aobo Yang, Archi Mi-tra, Archie Sravankumar, Artem Korenev, Arthur Hinsvark, and 542 others. 2024. The llama 3 herd of models. Preprint , arXiv:2407.21783. Dan Hendrycks, Collin Burns, Saurav Kadavath, Akul Arora, Steven Basart, Eric Tang, Dawn Song, and Jacob Steinhardt. 2021. Measuring mathematical problem solving with the math dataset. Preprint ,arXiv:2103.03874. Jaehyeong Jo and Sung Ju Hwang. 2025. Continuous diffusion model for language modeling. Preprint ,arXiv:2502.11564. Jared Kaplan, Sam McCandlish, Tom Henighan, Tom B. Brown, Benjamin Chess, Rewon Child, Scott Gray, Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, and Dario Amodei. 2020. Scaling laws for neural language models. Preprint ,arXiv:2001.08361. Inception Labs, Samar Khanna, Siddhant Kharbanda, Shufan Li, Harshit Varma, Eric Wang, Sawyer Birn-baum, Ziyang Luo, Yanis Miraoui, Akash Palrecha, Stefano Ermon, Aditya Grover, and Volodymyr Kuleshov. 2025. Mercury: Ultra-fast language mod-els based on diffusion. Preprint , arXiv:2506.17298. Remi Lebret, David Grangier, and Michael Auli. 2016. Neural text generation from structured data with application to the biography domain. Preprint ,arXiv:1603.07771. Jinsong Li, Xiaoyi Dong, Yuhang Zang, Yuhang Cao, Jiaqi Wang, and Dahua Lin. 2025. Beyond fixed: Training-free variable-length denoising for diffusion large language models. Preprint , arXiv:2508.00819. Junnan Li, Dongxu Li, Silvio Savarese, and Steven Hoi. 2023. Blip-2: Bootstrapping language-image pre-training with frozen image encoders and large lan-guage models. Preprint , arXiv:2301.12597. Haotian Liu, Chunyuan Li, Qingyang Wu, and Yong Jae Lee. 2023. Visual instruction tuning. Preprint ,arXiv:2304.08485. Sewon Min, Xinxi Lyu, Ari Holtzman, Mikel Artetxe, Mike Lewis, Hannaneh Hajishirzi, and Luke Zettle-moyer. 2022. Rethinking the role of demonstrations: What makes in-context learning work? Preprint ,arXiv:2202.12837. Niels Mündler, Jingxuan He, Hao Wang, Koushik Sen, Dawn Song, and Martin Vechev. 2025. Type-constrained code generation with language models. 

Proceedings of the ACM on Programming Languages ,9(PLDI):601–626. Shen Nie, Fengqi Zhu, Zebin You, Xiaolu Zhang, Jingyang Ou, Jun Hu, Jun Zhou, Yankai Lin, Ji-Rong Wen, and Chongxuan Li. 2025. Large language dif-fusion models. Preprint , arXiv:2502.09992. OpenAI. 2025. Introducing gpt-5. Long Ouyang, Jeff Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Car-roll L. Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, John Schulman, Jacob Hilton, Fraser Kelton, Luke Miller, Maddie Simens, Amanda Askell, Peter Welinder, Paul Christiano, Jan Leike, and Ryan Lowe. 2022. Training language models to follow instructions with human feedback. Preprint , arXiv:2203.02155. Rafael Rafailov, Archit Sharma, Eric Mitchell, Stefano Ermon, Christopher D. Manning, and Chelsea Finn. 2024. Direct preference optimization: Your lan-guage model is secretly a reward model. Preprint ,arXiv:2305.18290. John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. 2017. Prox-imal policy optimization algorithms. Preprint ,arXiv:1707.06347. Zhihong Shao, Peiyi Wang, Qihao Zhu, Runxin Xu, Junxiao Song, Xiao Bi, Haowei Zhang, Mingchuan Zhang, Y. K. Li, Y. Wu, and Daya Guo. 2024. Deepseekmath: Pushing the limits of mathemati-cal reasoning in open language models. Preprint ,arXiv:2402.03300. Yuxuan Song, Zheng Zhang, Cheng Luo, Pengyang Gao, Fan Xia, Hao Luo, Zheng Li, Yuehang Yang, Hongli Yu, Xingwei Qu, Yuwei Fu, Jing Su, Ge Zhang, Wenhao Huang, Mingxuan Wang, Lin Yan, Xiaoy-ing Jia, Jingjing Liu, Wei-Ying Ma, and 3 others. 2025. Seed diffusion: A large-scale diffusion lan-guage model with high-speed inference. Preprint ,arXiv:2508.02193. Yinjie Wang, Ling Yang, Bowen Li, Ye Tian, Ke Shen, and Mengdi Wang. 2025. Revolutionizing reinforce-ment learning framework for diffusion large language models. Preprint , arXiv:2509.06949. xAI. 2025. Grok 4. Honglin Xiong, Sheng Wang, Yitao Zhu, Zihao Zhao, Yuxiao Liu, Linlin Huang, Qian Wang, and Ding-gang Shen. 2023. Doctorglm: Fine-tuning your chinese doctor is not a herculean task. Preprint ,arXiv:2304.01097. An Yang, Anfeng Li, Baosong Yang, Beichen Zhang, Binyuan Hui, Bo Zheng, Bowen Yu, Chang Gao, Chengen Huang, Chenxu Lv, Chujie Zheng, Day-iheng Liu, Fan Zhou, Fei Huang, Feng Hu, Hao Ge, Haoran Wei, Huan Lin, Jialong Tang, and 41 others. 2025a. Qwen3 technical report. Preprint ,arXiv:2505.09388. Hongyang Yang, Xiao-Yang Liu, and Christina Dan Wang. 2023. Fingpt: Open-source financial large language models. Preprint , arXiv:2306.06031. Ling Yang, Ye Tian, Bowen Li, Xinchen Zhang, Ke Shen, Yunhai Tong, and Mengdi Wang. 2025b. Mmada: Multimodal large diffusion language mod-els. Preprint , arXiv:2505.15809. Jiacheng Ye, Zhihui Xie, Lin Zheng, Jiahui Gao, Zirui Wu, Xin Jiang, Zhenguo Li, and Lingpeng Kong. 2025. Dream 7b: Diffusion large language models. 

Preprint , arXiv:2508.15487. Qinyuan Ye, Maxamed Axmed, Reid Pryzant, and Fereshte Khani. 2024. Prompt engineering a prompt engineer. Preprint , arXiv:2311.05661. Zebin You, Shen Nie, Xiaolu Zhang, Jun Hu, Jun Zhou, Zhiwu Lu, Ji-Rong Wen, and Chongxuan Li. 2025. Llada-v: Large language diffusion models with visual instruction tuning. Preprint , arXiv:2505.16933. Siyan Zhao, Devaansh Gupta, Qinqing Zheng, and Aditya Grover. 2025. d1: Scaling reasoning in diffu-sion large language models via reinforcement learn-ing. Preprint , arXiv:2504.12216. Shengyao Zhuang, Xueguang Ma, Bevan Koopman, Jimmy Lin, and Guido Zuccon. 2025. Rank-r1: Enhancing reasoning in llm-based document rerankers via reinforcement learning. Preprint ,arXiv:2503.06034. 

A Notation Summary 

For details, please refer to table 5. 

B Experimental Settings 

For details, please refer to table 4. Parameter GSM8K MATH 

Dataset & Model 

Model Both Dream-7B-Base / Instruct Samples 1,319 5,000 Max New Tokens 256 512 

Hyperparameters 

Confidence Threshold ( c) 0.065 0.05 Expand Size ( ∆) 4 4Max Block Length ( M ) 512 512 Diffusion Steps 512 512 Batch Size 1 3

Environment 

Hardware NVIDIA vGPU (32G / 48G) Framework PyTorch 2.5.1, Python 3.10 

Table 4: Experimental Settings 

Symbol Description 

X = {Q, X L} Input sequence consisting of query Q and all-masked sequence XL

Q Input query provided to the dLLM 

XL Fully masked sequence to be partitioned 

B = {bk } Set of begin anchors inserted at block heads 

C = {Ck } Set of blocks parsed from XL

E = {ek } Set of end anchors infilled at block tails 

Ci The i-th block after anchor insertion 

|Ci| Current length of block Ci during expansion 

y Predicted subsequence scanned within Ci

c Confidence threshold for anchor detection 

∆ Expand size: number of tokens added per step 

M Maximum allowed length of a block Ci

Infer( X) Diffusion-based inference function 

Conf( y) Confidence score assigned to subsequence y

Table 5: Notation Summary 

C Case Study 

C.1 Base Model 

Case 1: Content out of anchor 

[Query] 

Brandon’s iPhone is four times as old as Ben’s iPhone. Ben’s iPhone is two times older than Suzy’s iPhone. If Suzy’s iPhone is 1 year old, how old is Brandon’s iPhone? 

[Output] 

<think> Suzy’s iPhone is 1 year old. Ben’s iPhone is two times older than Suzy’s iPhone, so Ben’s iPhone is 2 years old. Brandon’s iPhone is four times as old as Ben’s iPhone, so Brandon’s iPhone is 4years old. So the answer is 4 years 

old.</think><answer> 4 </answer> 

[Flaw] Content out of anchor (Output con-tinues unnecessarily after answer tag). 

Case 2: Missing anchors 

[Query] 

Well’s mother sells watermelons, peppers, and or-anges at the local store. A watermelon costs three times what each pepper costs. An orange costs 5 less than what a watermelon cost... (omitted for brevity) ... What’s the total amount of money he will spend if each pepper costs 15$? 

[Output] 

«think>First, I need to find the cost of a watermelon. Since a watermelon costs three times what each pepper costs... [Logic continues] ... For the oranges: 10 * 40 = 400 

[Flaw] Missing anchors (Failed to generate correct closing tags and answer block). 

C.2 Instruct Model 

Case 1: Incomplete response 

[Query] 

Peter plans to go to the movies this week. He always gets a ticket for $7 and popcorn for $7. If he has 42 dollars for the week, how many times can he go to the movies? 

[Output] 

<think><answer>3 times</answer> 

[Flaw] Missing anchors. Incomplete re-sponse. (Skipped reasoning process en-tirely). 

Case 2: Broken Tags 

[Query] 

Peter plans to go to the movies this week... (Same as above) 

[Output] 

"" <think>$21</think>"" 

[Flaw] Missing anchors. Incomplete re-sponse. C.3 Infilling Method 

> Case 1: Infinite Generation Loop
> [Query]
> Peter plans to go to the movies this week... (Same as above)

[Output] 

"" <think>...</think> <answer>....</answer> <think>.</think> <answer>....</answer> <think>....</think> <answer>....</answer> ... [Model repeats this pattern indefinitely] ... <think>....</think> <answer>....</answer>"" 

[Flaw] Broken response. (Model fails to terminate and hallucinates empty anchors). 

> Case 2: Hallucination
> [Query]
> Kyle bought last year’s best-selling book for $19.50. This is with a 25% discount from the original price. What was the original price of the book?

[Output] 

"" <think>25</think> <answer>25</answer> \nThe question:\n"" 

[Flaw] Content out of anchor. Incomplete response. C.4 DIA  

> Case 1: Successful Generation
> [Query]
> Charlie wants to sell beeswax candles. For every pound of beeswax, he can make 10 tapered candles. One pound of beeswax and the wicks cost $10.00 in supplies. If he sells each candle for $2.00 each, what is his net profit if he makes and sells 20 candles?

[Output] 

""<think>First, I need to figure out how much candles Charlie can make with 20 candles... [Reasoning Steps] ... Therefore, Charlie will profit a net of $20.00 and makes and sells 20 candles0</think><answer> 20</answer>"" 

[Flaw] None. (High quality reasoning and format compliance). 

> Case 2: Minor Length Prediction Error
> [Query]
> John drives for 3 hours at a speed of 60 mph... (omit-ted for brevity) ... How far is he from home at the end of those 4 hours?

[Output] 

""<think>... [Correct Reasoning Steps] ... Since, he traveled 180 miles away from home and then covered 175 miles back„, he is distance from home at 180 - 175 = 5 miles. the end of those 4hours, he, he, 55555555555555 miles5</think><answer>5 miles</answer>"" 

[Flaw] Generation length prediction not completely accurate. (Model pads the end of reasoning with repetitive tokens to fill predicted length). 

D dLLM Prompt Template              

> Prompt Template for Reasoning Task
> [Instruction]
> You are a helpful assistant that helps the user to solve the question.
> [Output Format]
> You need to think first and then answer the question briefly by following the format: <think>...</think><answer>...</answer>.
> [Input]
> Here are the questions: {QUESTION}

Figure 5: The prompt template used for guiding the model to generate structured reasoning chains. 

E Stage Ablating Experiment on Reasoning Benchmarks 

Table 6 details our stage ablation. Stage 1 (con-fidence prediction) is crucial for strict format ad-herence. Stage 2 (iterative denoising) is indispens-able; ablating it prevents generating any concrete responses. 

F Reasoning Benchmark Results under different Hyper Parameters 

We analyzed parameter sensitivity in Table 7. Threshold C dictates truncation certainty, while 

∆ governs expansion aggressiveness. A smaller ∆

causes premature truncation (yielding high format GSM8K MATH Method Acc. Sf ormat Latency Acc. Sf ormat Latency DIA (Ablated Stage 1) 10.31 0.00 14.99 6.73 0.84 15.33 

DIA (Full Method) 47.54 59.67 25.86 20.20 75.62 29.37 

> Table 6: Detailed results of DIA method ablation (Full Metrics)

GSM8K 

C = 0 .035 C = 0 .05 C = 0 .065 

Acc. Sf ormat Latency Acc. Sf ormat Latency Acc. Sf ormat Latency 

∆ = 2 14.48 90.60 17.27 14.25 90.60 17.23 14.71 89.54 17.70 

∆ = 4 47.31 60.42 25.72 47.54 59.67 25.86 47.54 58.91 26.64 

∆ = 8 48.60 57.32 25.78 48.37 56.71 25.98 48.37 56.56 26.52 

MATH 

C = 0 .035 C = 0 .05 C = 0 .065 

Acc. Sf ormat Latency Acc. Sf ormat Latency Acc. Sf ormat Latency 

∆ = 2 7.40 90.38 23.52 7.58 90.42 24.81 7.82 89.60 26.02 

∆ = 4 18.30 78.96 30.55 18.88 77.96 31.72 19.48 75.98 34.12 

∆ = 8 20.20 75.62 29.37 20.54 75.00 30.62 21.64 69.67 30.42 

> Table 7: DIA results in different hyper parameter combinations.

retention), whereas a larger ∆ provides sufficient reasoning space (boosting accuracy). Thus, ∆ acts as a flexible knob balancing format strictness and reasoning depth, achieving optimal performance when paired with confidence-based prediction. 

G Usage of LLMs 

We acknowledge the use of large language models (LLMs) in the preparation of this paper. LLMs were employed exclusively as writing assistance tools for language polishing, grammar refinement, and readability improvement. They were not in-volved in research ideation, experimental design, or data analysis. All technical ideas, theoretical developments, proofs, and experimental results pre-sented in this paper are entirely the work of the authors, who take full responsibility for the accu-racy and integrity of the final submission. 

H Ethics and Transparency Statement 

Artifacts and Licensing : All artifacts used in this study are open-source and utilized for re-search purposes. The GSM8K and MATH datasets are provided under the MIT License. The Wik-iBio dataset is distributed under the Creative Com-mons Attribution-ShareAlike 3.0 Unported License (CC BY-SA 3.0). The baseline Dream-7B models and their associated codebase are licensed under Apache License 2.0. Computational frameworks, including PyTorch, are used under their respective open-source licenses ( e.g. , BSD-style). 

Intended Use Compliance : We confirm that our use of the GSM8K, MATH, and WikiBio datasets, as well as the Dream-7B models, is strictly for aca-demic research purposes. This is fully consistent with their intended use as benchmarks and base models for evaluating and enhancing the reasoning and generation capabilities of large language mod-els. Specifically, our use of the WikiBio dataset aligns with its original purpose of evaluating text generation algorithms, and we strictly adhere to its attribution and share-alike requirements. 

Documentation : We provide a concise descrip-tion of the artifacts used in this study, covering their target domains, supported languages, and task spec-ifications to ensure a comprehensive understanding of the experimental context: • GSM8K: Consists of high-quality grade school math word problems. It covers multi-step arithmetic reasoning in the English lan-guage. • MATH: A challenging benchmark spanning competition-level problems from elementary to advanced mathematics (e.g., Algebra, Cal-culus) in English .• WikiBio: A dataset comprising 728,321 biographies extracted from the English Wikipedia dump. It provides tokenized in-foboxes and the corresponding first para-graphs of articles, primarily serving as a benchmark for evaluating structured data-to-text generation. • Dream-7B: A series of diffusion large lan-guage models designed for general-purpose language understanding and instruction fol-lowing, with specific optimizations for paral-lel generation.