1
Generator-Guided Inverse Sampling for
L´evy-Driven Generative Models
Tianfu Qi, Graduate Student Member, IEEE, Jun Wang, Senior Member, IEEE, Jun Zhang, Fellow, IEEE
Abstract—This paper studies inverse sampling for L´evy-driven
generative models from the perspective of Markov generators.
Unlike conventional diffusion models, L´evy-driven dynamics
involve infinite jump activities, which makes their reverse process
nonlocal and difficult to characterize using score information
alone. We address this challenge by analyzing the forward and
reversed generators. It is derived that the reversed jump compo-
nent generally becomes a state-dependent Markov jump process
governed by a nonlocal density ratio. This observation motivates
a structured reverse sampler that decomposes the dynamics into
diffusion, small jump, and large jump components. Based on this
characterization, we develop a computationally tractable sampler
for a class of isotropic linear L´evy SDEs with symmetric α-
stable jump components. For the jump component, the neural
network is used only to amortize the rate of large jump activities,
while jump amplitudes are generated from analytically derived
conditional distributions, which improves interpretability and
controllability. Efficient implementation techniques are further
introduced under this setting to avoid expensive high-dimensional
integration and sampling. The sampler is further adapted to
approximate observation-guided sampling and applied to OFDM-
SISO channel estimation under mixed Gaussian and impulsive
noise. Simulations show robust estimation performance with a
favorable tradeoff between complexity and performance.
Index Terms—Inverse sampling, L´evy process, stable distribu-
tion, generative model
I. INTRODUCTION
Diffusion models based on score matching have emerged as
a powerful class of generative models [1]–[4]. They have also
attracted increasing attention in signal processing applications,
including inverse problem solving [5]–[10], image restoration
[11]–[14], and wireless channel estimation [15]–[17]. By
gradually perturbing data with Gaussian noise and learning
the reverse dynamics through score matching, these models
provide a stochastic framework for sampling from complex
data distributions.
Despite their success, conventional diffusion models are
mainly built on the Wiener process. Their reverse process
is characterized by local score information and infinitesimal
Gaussian perturbations [1], [3]. As a result, long-range proba-
bility transport is usually achieved through a sequence of small
reverse steps. This local update mechanism may affect sam-
pling efficiency and modeling flexibility [18], especially when
Tianfu Qi, Jun Wang are with the National Key Laboratory of Wire-
less Communications, University of Electronic Science and Technology of
China, Chengdu 611731, China (e-mail: 202311220634@std.uestc.edu.cn;
junwang@uestc.edu.cn).
J. Zhang is with the Department of Electronic and Computer Engineering,
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Hong Kong, China (e-mail:
eejzhang@ust.hk).
the target distribution has heavy tails, impulsive components,
or highly multimodal structures [19], [20].
L´evy-driven generative models provide a natural extension
by incorporating jump components into the forward dynamics
[21]. The resulting nonlocal transitions are well suited for
modeling heavy-tailed perturbations. They can also provide
more flexible distribution transport than standard diffusion dy-
namics [19]. However, these advantages bring new challenges
for inverse sampling. Unlike the case without jumps, the time
reversal of a L´evy-driven process cannot be fully characterized
by local score information alone [19], [20]. Its reversed jump
component depends on a nonlocal density ratio. It generally
becomes a Markov jump process with state-dependent kernels,
which makes the inverse sampler difficult to design.
It has been shown in [19] that the denoising score matching
(DSM) framework can still be applied to inverse sampling
for L´evy processes. Under this formulation, the neural net-
work is required to learn denoising targets associated with
impulsive perturbations, such as those induced by α-stable
distributions. However, different from white Gaussian noise
(WGN), impulse noise (IN) contains multiple outliers with
large amplitudes. Compared with WGN, which has a relatively
stable envelope over a long time interval, IN is much more
impulsive and chaotic. Therefore, it is difficult to learn the sta-
tistical characteristics of impulse noise at different moments.
In this case, full neural parameterization makes the sampler
less interpretable and controllable.
Motivated by these observations, we aim to establish a
generator-guided inverse sampling approach for L´evy-driven
generative models. The generator provides a fundamental char-
acterization of the infinitesimal statistics of Markov processes
and naturally reveals the nonlocal structure of the reversed
jump dynamics. Based on this structural characterization, we
design a practical sampler under isotropic linear α-stable
assumptions, so that the main components of the reverse
dynamics can be implemented in a statistically interpretable
and computationally tractable manner. The main contributions
of this paper are summarized as follows.
• First, we provide a generator-based characterization
of the time-reversed dynamics of L´evy-driven Markov
processes. The analysis shows that the reversed jump
component is generally a state-dependent Markov jump
process whose kernel involves a nonlocal density ratio.
This result clarifies why reverse sampling for L´evy-driven
processes cannot, in general, be reduced to score-based
local diffusion updates.
• Second, motivated by this characterization, we de-
velop a practical inverse sampler for isotropic linear
arXiv:2608.10384v1  [cs.LG]  11 Aug 2026


2
L´evy SDEs with symmetric α-stable jump compo-
nents. The reverse dynamics are decomposed into diffu-
sion, small jump, and large jump parts. The small jump
contribution is approximated through a Gaussian surro-
gate, while large jumps are handled explicitly through a
rate-and-amplitude decomposition. The neural network is
used to amortize the large jump rate, whereas jump ampli-
tudes are sampled from analytically derived conditional
distributions.
• Third, we adapt the proposed sampler to approx-
imate observation-guided sampling under observa-
tion models and demonstrate its use in OFDM-
SISO channel estimation with mixed Gaussian and
impulsive noise. In particular, the prior-trained jump rate
network is retained as a proposal mechanism and the
observation likelihood is incorporated through reweighted
distributions. The resulting algorithm provides a robust
estimator under heavy-tailed perturbations and offers an
interpretable alternative to fully neural reverse-transition
parameterizations.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In
Section II, we describe the L´evy process considered through-
out this paper and present the corresponding assumptions.
Statistical analyses from the generator perspective are given in
Section III. Based on the above theoretical results, an efficient
inverse sampling algorithm is designed in Section IV. Section
V provides simulation results for channel estimation under
mixed channel noise to validate the proposed inverse sampling
framework. Section VI concludes the paper.
Notations: Vectors are denoted by bold letters and are
assumed to be column vectors by default. Superscripts and
subscripts are also used to denote vectors and vector se-
quences. For example, given an m-dimensional vector x,
we have x = [x1, x2, · · · , xm]⊤and xp
1 = [x1, · · · , xp]⊤.
Uppercase letters denote random variables (RVs), and low-
ercase letters denote their realizations, e.g., X and x. The
operators ∆, ∇, and ∇· denote the Laplace operator, gradient
operator, and divergence operator, respectively. The notation
diag(a1, a2, · · · , aL) represents a diagonal matrix with diago-
nal elements a1, a2, · · · , aL. ⟨x, y⟩denotes the inner product
of vectors x and y. 1A(x) denotes the indicator function,
which equals 1 if x ∈A. The real number domain is denoted
by R. The notation X ∼· indicates that X follows a certain
distribution.
II. PRELIMINARIES
In this paper, we consider a L´evy process with drift and
diffusion components, which can be generally written as
dXt = b(Xt, t)dt + ΦG(t)dWt + ΦS(t)dLt,
t : 0 →T, Xt ∈RD
(1)
where D denotes the dimension of the SDE. The term b(Xt, t)
is the drift coefficient of the dynamics, which depends on both
the time index t and the system state Xt. The processes Wt
and Lt denote the Wiener process and the α-stable process,
respectively. The matrices ΦG(t) and ΦS(t) denote the scaling
matrices for Wt and Lt, respectively. For isotropic cases,
ΦG(t) and ΦS(t) reduce to scaled identity matrices. In the
sequel, we focus on the SDE under the following assumptions.
Assumption 1: The Wiener process Wt and the L´evy process
Lt are mutually independent.
Assumption 2: Lt is a D-dimensional symmetric isotropic
α-stable L´evy process with stability index α ∈(0, 2).
Our ultimate goal is to investigate the characteristics of the
reverse process corresponding to the SDE in (1) and design
an efficient reverse sampler. Unfortunately, unlike a diffusion
process driven only by Brownian motion, (1) is a L´evy process
with infinite jump activities. Its reverse process cannot be
described using only local information. In other words, if we
set ΦS(t) ≡0, the backward process of (1) can be determined
by the score information, i.e., ∇log p(xt). This information
is local since it only requires the gradient of the density.
This property can be obtained by analyzing the forward and
backward Kolmogorov equations, which are special cases of
the Kramers-Moyal (KM) expansion. The core idea of the KM
expansion is to express the time evolution of the probability
density as an infinite series of state-space changes.
For diffusion processes driven by Brownian motion, this
series can be truncated after the first two terms, which leads
to the forward Kolmogorov equation. However, if ΦS(t)̸ = 0,
large jumps may appear in (1) due to dLt. As a result,
∥Xt+∆t −Xt∥can be quite large. Moreover, the KM expan-
sion involves the j-th moment of Xt, where j ∈Z+ S{0}.
For a L´evy process driven by an α-stable process, finite p-
th moments with p ≥α do not exist. Therefore, the reverse
process becomes much more complicated. In the following,
we use the generator to analyze the statistical properties of
(1).
Given the forward dynamics in (1), its generator is given
by [21]
(LF f) (x) =b(x, t) · ∇f(x) + 1
2Tr
 Σ(t)∇2f(x)

+ (LJ,F f)(x)
(2)
where Σ(t) = ΦG(t)ΦG(t)⊤and (LJ,F f)(x) denotes the
forward generator of the process ΦS(t)dLt. The backward
generator of the reversed version of (1) will be characterized
in the next section. Before ending this section, we introduce
the following assumptions, which ensure the validity of the
subsequent analysis.
Assumption 3: The forward SDE admits a non-explosive
Markov solution with transition density p(xt) with respect to
the Lebesgue measure.
Assumption 4: The density p(xt) is strictly positive and
sufficiently smooth so that ∇log p(xt) is well defined.
III. GENERATOR-BASED REVERSE DYNAMICS
In this section, we first derive the backward generator corre-
sponding to the forward process in (1). Then, we theoretically
analyze how to decompose the whole inverse sampling process
and generate each component.
A. Backward generator
Throughout this paper, the term “backward generator” refers
to the infinitesimal generator of the time-reversed process.


3
It should not be confused with the backward Kolmogorov
operator associated with the forward process. For notational
clarity, we write p(xt) for the marginal density of Xt.
Based on (1) and its forward generator (2), the backward
generator is given in the following proposition.
Proposition 1 (Backward generator): Consider the forward
SDE in (1) with L´evy measure ν. Let νt = (ΦS(t))#ν be
the push-forward L´evy measure induced by the jump scaling
matrix ΦS(t). Suppose that the forward process admits a
strictly positive marginal density p(xt), and that p(xt) and
b(x, t) are sufficiently smooth and integrable so that the
following integrations by parts and principal-value integrals
are well defined. If the scaled L´evy measure νt is symmetric,
then for any test function f ∈C2
c (RD), the generator of the
reversed process can be written as
(LBf)(xt) = [−b(xt, t) + Σ(t)∇log p(xt)] · ∇f(xt)
+ 1
2 Tr
 Σ(t)∇2f(xt)

+ (LJ,Bf)(xt)
(3)
(LJ,Bf)(xt) = p. v.
Z
RD [f(xt + v) −f(xt)]
× p(xt + v)
p(xt)
νt(dv).
(4)
where p. v. denotes the Cauchy principal-value interpretation.
Proof: The proof is relegated to Appendix A.
Remark 1: The jump integral in Proposition 1 is understood
as
p. v.
Z
RD [f(xt + v) −f(xt)] p(xt + v)
p(xt)
νt(dv)
= lim
ϵ→0
Z
∥v∥>ϵ
[f(xt + v) −f(xt)] p(xt + v)
p(xt)
νt(dv).
For α < 1, the integral is locally absolutely integrable
under standard smoothness assumptions. For α ≥1, the
uncompensated integral is generally not absolutely integrable
near the origin and should be interpreted in the Cauchy
principal-value sense. To see this, for smooth f and p(xt),
we have f(xt + v) −f(xt) = ∇f(xt)⊤v + O(∥v∥2) and
p(xt+v)
p(xt)
= 1 + v⊤∇log p(xt) + O(∥v∥2). The leading first-
order term is odd in v and is canceled by the symmetry of νt in
the principal-value sense. The remaining second-order terms
are locally integrable for α < 2. This justifies the principal-
value form used in Proposition 1.
Remark 2: We specify the explicit expression of the scaled
L´evy measure νt(dv) to facilitate the following analysis.
For the D-dimensional case, the standard L´evy measure is
defined as ν(dv) = CD,α∥v∥−D−α [21], where CD,α =
α2α−1Γ( D+α
2
)
π
D
2 Γ(1−α
2 ) . Combined with the effect of ΦS(t) = σS(t)ID,
we have νt(dv) = |σS(t)|αν(dv). In the following, we denote
CD,α,σS ≜|σS(t)|αCD,α to avoid redundancy.
From Proposition 1, we can see that the backward kernel is
related to the density ratio p(xt+v)
p(xt) , which contains global in-
formation. Therefore, the jump part only belongs to a Markov-
type jump process rather than a L´evy process. This process
is much more general and is not as mathematically tractable
as the forward process. Consequently, the total reversed SDE
corresponding to (1) cannot be expressed as the superposition
of a modified drift term, a diffusion term, and a stable process.
This makes it challenging to design an efficient sampler
directly, as in the diffusion case.
Besides guiding the design of the reverse sampler, the
backward generator is also useful for understanding discrete
diffusion processes. For example, in a standard DDPM driven
by a Gaussian transition kernel, p(xt−∆t|xt) can be modeled
by a Gaussian distribution for the following reason. First,
with sufficient diffusion, xT can be approximated by a Gaus-
sian distribution. Next, based on the backward Kolmogorov
equation, the drift of the reversed SDE is −(b(xt, t) −
g(t)2∇log p(xt, t))dt, where g(t) is the coefficient of the
Wiener process in the forward SDE. At t = T, we have
∇log p(xT , T) ∝−xT . Then, we discretize the continuous
time interval with step size ∆t. In this case, xT −∆t =
xT −(b(xT , T)+xT )∆t+g(t)
√
∆tw, where w ∼N(0, ID)
and b(xt, t) is usually set as an affine function of xt. This
recursive formula is equivalent to the summation of Gaussian-
distributed RVs. Therefore, p(xt−∆t|xt) can be treated as
a Gaussian distribution, and the objective loss function can
be significantly simplified by regressing the expectation of
xt, t : T →0.
Unfortunately, according to Proposition 1, this simplifica-
tion does not hold for the process in (1). In the sequel, we
will design a simple loss function that is more suitable for
neural network learning.
B. Reverse sampling decomposition
From the definition of the generator, given the jump
kernel K(dv), the term
R
RD(f(x + v) −f(x))K(dv) in-
dicates that the jump amplitude follows the distribution
K(dv)/
R
RD K(dv). However, the number of small jumps
with ∥v∥≤ϵ is usually infinite due to the singularity of the
L´evy measure at the origin. Therefore, we handle small and
large jumps separately. Specifically, we decompose the original
integral by truncation with threshold ϵ:
Z
RD(f(x + v) −f(x))K(dv)
=
Z
∥v∥≤ϵ
(f(x + v) −f(x))K(dv)
+
Z
∥v∥>ϵ
(f(x + v) −f(x))K(dv)
(5)
In other words, jumps with amplitude larger than ϵ are
treated as large jumps. For large jumps, the occurrence fre-
quency is finite. The number of large jumps follows a Poisson
distribution with rate λ ≜
R
∥v∥>ϵ K(dv). For a sufficiently
small time interval ∆t, the occurrence of a large jump can also
be approximated by a Bernoulli distribution with probability
λ∆t. If a large jump occurs, we need to obtain one jump
sample from the normalized distribution
K(dv)
λ
. Otherwise,
no large jump occurs within the interval ∆t, and the reversed
process reduces to the standard diffusion process.
For the case with ∥v∥≤ϵ, the L´evy measure is not
integrable, and there are infinitely many small jumps. Unlike
large jump activities, these small jumps cannot be enumerated


4
explicitly. The distribution of small jumps is also complicated,
which does not follow a Gaussian or stable distribution due
to amplitude truncation. A simple method is to directly ignore
small jump activities when the threshold ϵ is small enough.
However, this may introduce considerable approximation er-
ror, especially when the small jumps have a nonzero mean.
Meanwhile, this effect accumulates when ∆t is small.
Here, we adopt a more reasonable approach. After trun-
cation, the small jumps have a finite second moment. Thus,
we replace the small jump generator by a Gaussian generator
matching the first two local moments. This is a weak approx-
imation whose generator error is controlled by the third local
moment of the truncated L´evy measure. Namely, the small
jump part within [t, t+∆t], denoted by X≤ϵ
t,∆t, can be written
as
X≤ϵ
t,∆t ≈b≤ϵ
t,∆t∆t +
√
∆t(Σ≤ϵ
t,∆t)
1
2 W
(6)
where W is the standard Gaussian RV and
b≤ϵ
t,∆t = p. v.
Z
∥v∥≤ϵ
vK(dv)
(7)
Substituting the state-dependent backward jump kernel into
the small jump drift, we have
b≤ϵ
t,∆t = p. v.
Z
∥v∥≤ϵ
v p(xt + v)
p(xt)
νt(dv)
=
Z
∥v∥≤ϵ
v
p(xt + v)
p(xt)
−1

νt(dv)
=
Z
∥v∥≤ϵ
v
 v⊤∇log p(xt) + Rp(xt, v, t)

νt(dv)
= Aνt∇log p(xt) + Rb,ϵ(xt, t),
(8)
where the truncated second-order moment matrix is defined
as Aνt ≜
R
∥v∥≤ϵ vv⊤νt(dv) and the Taylor remainder is
Rb,ϵ(xt, t) ≜
R
∥v∥≤ϵ vRp(xt, v, t)νt(dv). Here, the second
equality follows from the symmetry of νt, which gives
p. v.
Z
∥v∥≤ϵ
vνt(dv) = 0.
(9)
If p(xt) is locally smooth and strictly positive, then
p(xt + v)
p(xt)
= 1 + v⊤∇log p(xt) + Rp(xt, v, t),
|Rp(xt, v, t)| ≤C∥v∥2.
(10)
For the isotropic α-stable L´evy measure νt(dv)
=
C∥v∥−D−αdv, the drift remainder satisfies
∥Rb,ϵ(xt, t)∥≤C
Z
∥v∥≤ϵ
∥v∥3νt(dv)
= Cϵ3−α.
(11)
Therefore, by replacing the unknown score ∇log p(xt)
with the score network sθ1(xt, t), the practical approximation
becomes
b≤ϵ
t,∆t ≈Aνtsθ1(xt, t).
(12)
Similarly, the covariance matrix of the small jump compo-
nent is given by
Σ≤ϵ
t,∆t
=
Z
∥v∥≤ϵ
vv⊤ 1 + v⊤∇log p(xt) + Rp(xt, v, t)

νt(dv)
= Aνt + RΣ,ϵ(xt, t).
(13)
where the remaining Taylor term satisfies
∥RΣ,ϵ(xt, t)∥≤C
Z
∥v∥≤ϵ
∥v∥4νt(dv) = Cϵ4−α.
(14)
Thus, the covariance matrix can be approximated as
Σ≤ϵ
t,∆t ≈Aνt.
(15)
Both (8) and (15) admit closed-form expressions based on
the polar coordinate transform. For instance,
Aνt =
Z
∥v∥≤ϵ
vv⊤νt(dv)
=|SD−1|CD,α,σSID
D
Z ϵ
0
r1−αdr
=2π
D
2 CD,α,σSϵ2−α
DΓ( D
2 )(2 −α) ID,
(16)
where ID denotes the D-dimentional identity matrix and SD−1
represents the D −1-dimensional sphere. Note that this is a
generator-level weak approximation rather than an exact Gaus-
sian representation of the small jump sum. Denote the effect
of large jumps on Xt by X>ϵ
t,∆t. Then, the total jump influence
during the reverse sampling process is X≤ϵ
t,∆t+X>ϵ
t,∆t. Finally,
by combining the externally applied drift term and the reversed
diffusion part, the recursive relation between Xt−∆t and Xt
can be constructed.
IV. INVERSE SAMPLING
According to the above analysis, the main challenge of
inverse sampling comes from large jump sampling. Therefore,
this section mainly focuses on how to generate large jump
samples based on the current system state and time instant.
First, we explain how to obtain large jump samples. We also
show that, from a theoretical perspective, a neural network is
not necessary for reverse sampling. These observations help
determine the learning target and design the corresponding
network structure. Then, two techniques are introduced to
effectively reduce the complexity. Finally, since additional
conditions are often required to control the generation process
in practical applications, we also discuss an approximate
observation-guided version for inverse problems.
Before proceeding, we first describe a special family of
functions that is important for efficient learning.
In many scenarios, we may want to train a network to
regress a target f(x) that is not directly accessible. How-
ever, we can efficiently evaluate only its conditional version
f(x|x0). Thus, we aim to establish the condition under which
optimizing the neural network based on f(x|x0) is equivalent
to optimizing it based on f(x). This is the core of the
following theorem.


5
Theorem 1 (Marginal trainable functions): Define the accu-
rate target and conditional target as l(x) : RD →R ˜
D and
l(x|x0) : RD →R ˜
D, respectively. Denote the neural network
by f θ(x), which is used to regress l(x). Then, the optimization
problem arg minθ Ex∼p(x)[∥f θ(x) −l(x)∥2] is equivalent to
arg minθ Ex,x0∼p(x,x0)[∥f θ(x) −l(x|x0)∥2] if
l(x) =
Z
l(x|x0)p(x0|x)dx0
(17)
and the functions l(x) satisfying (17) are referred to as
marginally trainable functions.
Proof: The original optimization problem can be refor-
mulated as follows:
Ex∼p(x)[∥f θ(x) −l(x)∥2]
=Ex∼p(x)[∥f θ(x)∥2] −2Ex∼p(x)[f θ(x)l(x)]
+ Ex∼p(x)[∥l(x)∥2]
(18)
The third term in (18) is independent of θ and can be
ignored. For the second term,
Ex∼p(x)[f θ(x)l(x)] =
Z
f θ(x)
Z
l(x|x0)p(x0|x)dx0p(x)dx
=
Z Z
f θ(x)l(x|x0)p(x0|x)p(x)dx0dx
=Ex,x0∼p(x,x0)[f θ(x)l(x|x0)]
(19)
Plugging (19) into (18) completes the proof.
Theorem 1 provides sufficient conditions under which a
wide range of functions can be used for network training. In
fact, Theorem 1 is general since it includes conventional train-
ing frameworks such as score matching and flow matching. For
example, the target of score matching is the score function
∇log p(xt), which is not accessible in practice. Therefore,
the conditional score ∇log p(xt|x0) is usually used, together
with the simple underlying relationship between xt and x0. It
can be verified that
∇log p(xt) =
1
p(xt)∇
Z
p(xt|x0)p(x0)dx0
=
Z
∇p(xt|x0)
p(xt)p(xt|x0)p(x0)p(xt|x0)dx0
=
Z ∇p(xt|x0)
p(xt|x0) p(x0|xt)dx0
=
Z
∇log p(xt|x0)p(x0|xt)dx0
(20)
Hence, ∇log p(xt) belongs to the class of marginally
trainable functions. Similar derivations apply to the training
of the conditional vector field in flow matching [22].
A. Sampling of large jumps
Suppose that the dataset x0,j, j = 1, · · · , N is available.
According to the forward SDE, the expressions of p(xt|x0)
and
p(xt+v|x0)
p(xt|x0)
can usually be efficiently obtained. Conse-
quently,
p(xt + v)
p(xt)
=
Z p(xt + v|x0)
p(xt|x0)
p(x0|xt)dx0
=
Z p(xt + v|x0)
p(xt|x0)
p(x0)p(xt|x0)
p(xt)
dx0
=
Z p(xt + v|x0)
p(xt|x0)
w(xt, x0)p(x0)dx0
≈1
N
N
X
j=1
p(xt + v|x0,j)
p(xt|x0,j)
w(xt, x0,j)
(21)
where we define
w(xt, x0) ≜p(xt|x0)
p(xt)
=
p(xt|x0)
R
p(xt|x0)p(x0)dx0
≈
p(xt|x0)
1
N
PN
j=1 p(xt|x0,j)
(22)
As for the overall jump rate, we have
λ(xt) ≜
Z
∥v∥>ϵ
p(xt + v)
p(xt)
νt(dv)
=
1
PN
j=1 p(xt|x0,j)
N
X
j=1
Z
∥v∥>ϵ
p(xt + v|x0,j)νt(dv)
(23)
Finally, the unnormalized jump distribution is written as
follows,
q(xt, v) ≜p(xt + v)
p(xt)
νt(dv)
≈
PN
j=1 p(xt + v|x0,j)
PN
j=1 p(xt|x0,j)
νt(dv), ∥v∥> ϵ
(24)
The standard score function can also be directly approxi-
mated from the dataset based on (20) as follows:
∇log p(xt) =
Z
∇log p(xt|x0)p(x0|xt)dx0
≈1
N
N
X
j=1
w(xt, x0,j)∇p(xt|x0,j)
p(xt|x0,j)
(25)
With the above procedure, reverse sampling can be per-
formed using the distribution p(xt|x0). However, this intro-
duces an unacceptable computational burden during inference.
For example, w(xt, x0) and λ(xt) need to be calculated at
every iteration. This remains time-consuming, even though the
explicit expression of p(xt|x0) and the integral in (23) are
available.
B. Network amortization
To make large jump sampling more efficient, we use a neural
network to amortize part of the computational burden and
accelerate inference.
Based on the previous analysis, there are several possi-
ble learnable targets, including the density ratio
p(xt+v)
p(xt) ,
the prior distribution p(xt), and the logarithmic density ra-
tio log p(xt+v)
p(xt) . However, these choices lead to numerical


6
challenges during both learning and sampling. For example,
consider learning p(xt+v)
p(xt) . Its advantage is that it is marginally
trainable, so the learning target can be easily computed from
its conditional version. However, large jump sampling requires
numerical integration with respect to dv to obtain the over-
all jump rate. This is infeasible for high-dimensional data,
since the integrand value must be obtained from the network
output. Even though analytical expressions of p(xt|x0,j) and
R
∥v∥>ϵ p(xt +v|x0,j)νt(dv) can be derived, 2N additions are
still required at each iteration. In addition, numerical stability
is not guaranteed when p(xt) is very small but p(xt + v) is
relatively large. In this case, p(xt+v)
p(xt)
behaves like an outlier
with a large amplitude.
Although this issue can be alleviated by applying the loga-
rithm, log p(xt+v)
p(xt)
does not satisfy the conditions in Theorem
1. Moreover, the integration difficulty still remains. As for
p(xt), it requires the network to learn the absolute values of
the global probability distribution, which is difficult, especially
when D is large. Note that the method in [19] is equivalent
to directly learning reverse sampling, and its large jump part
is generated by the target distribution. This approach places a
heavier burden on the network, making it more like a black
box and difficult to control.
Therefore, we choose to learn the large jump rate, i.e.,
λ(xt). This task is similar to parameter estimation for a
specialized distribution. From this perspective, it is more
learnable than p(xt) and p(xt+v)
p(xt) . Moreover, although λ(xt)
is the integral of the density ratio with respect to the L´evy
measure, it still belongs to the class of marginally train-
able functions. Therefore, it can be efficiently trained using
λ(xt|x0) ≜
R
∥v∥>ϵ
p(xt+v|x0)
p(xt|x0) νt(dv).
Based on the above discussion, the next proposition provides
the loss function for the jump part. For the diffusion part, the
standard score matching framework can be directly used.
Proposition 2 (Loss function for jump activities): The loss
function of the neural network for learning the overall jump
rate is given as follows:
L(θ) =Et∼U[0,1],xt∼p(xt|x0),x0∼p(x0)

∥gθ2(xt, t)
−λ(xt|x0)∥2
(26)
C. Efficient calculation of large jump rate
The remaining two main challenges in bridging the gap
between theoretical analysis and practical applications are how
to calculate the target value in (26) and how to rapidly sample
a large jump from the distribution q(xt, v). Here, we first
focus on the first problem.
So far, we have not imposed specific assumptions on the
coefficients in (1), except that the drift coefficient depends
on both the system state and the time index, while the
scaling matrices of the Wiener process and the stable process
depend only on the time index. For the design of a specific
reverse sampling algorithm, its expressions need to be further
specified.The principle is to make the learning process
as simple as possible without sacrificing much generality.
Similar to conventional diffusion models and SDEs driven
only by the Wiener process [1], [3], we make the following
assumptions.
Assumption 5: b(Xt, t) is an affine function of Xt,
i.e., b(Xt, t)
=
RXt + s, which is similar to the
Ornstein-Uhlenbeck (OU) process. Since b(Xt, t) is a time-
homogeneous drift, we rewrite it as b(Xt) in the sequel.
Assumption 6: For ΦG(t) and ΦS(t), we restrict them to
diagonal matrices, i.e., ΦG(t) = diag(σG,1(t), · · · , σG,D(t))
and ΦS(t) = diag(σS,1(t), · · · , σS,D(t)).
In the following, we rewrite b(Xt, t) as b(Xt) because it
is directly related only to Xt. Under these configurations, the
distribution of Xt generated from a given X0 can be explicitly
determined.
Proposition 3 (Distribution of Xt): Consider the forward
SDE in (1). Let b(Xt), ΦG(t), and ΦS(t) satisfy Assump-
tions 5 and 6. Then, Xt = µ(t, x0) + G(t) + S(t), where
G(t) ∼N(0, ΣG) and S(t) follows an α-stable distribution
with characteristic function ϕS(t). Moreover,
µ(t, x0) = exp(Rt)x0 + exp(Rt)
Z t
0
exp(−Rl)sdl
(27)
ΣG(t) =
Z t
0
exp((t −l)R)ΦG(l)ΦG(l)⊤exp((t −l)R⊤)dl
(28)
ϕS(u, t) = exp

−
Z t
0
ΦS(l)⊤exp((t −l)R⊤)u
α
2 dl

(29)
Proof: The proof is relegated to Appendix B.
Corollary 1 (Distribution of Xt for special cases): As-
sume that R, ΦG(t), and ΦS(t) are all scaled iden-
tity matrices, i.e., R
=
R0ID, ΦG(t)
=
σG(t)ID,
and ΦS(t) = σS(t)ID. The other settings are the same
as those in Proposition 3. Then, ΣG(t)
=
γG(t)2ID,
where
γG(t)
=
qR t
0 exp(2R0(t −l))σG(l)2dl.
More-
over, ϕS(u, t)
=
exp(−γα(t)α∥u∥α
2 ), where γα(t)
=
(
R t
0 |σS(l)|α exp(αR0(t −l))dl)
1
α .
Remark 3: From Proposition 3, it can be observed that
the final distribution of XT is still related to X0. In practice,
we can choose T and R < 0 such that exp(RT)X0 ≈0.
In this case, the original distribution of the inverse sampling
can be set to the mixed distribution composed of Gaussian
distribution and α-stable distribution.
Proposition 3 and Corollary 1 imply that if R, ΦG(t),
and ΦS(t) are diagonal matrices with different diagonal el-
ements, the isotropic property of the distribution of Xt will
be destroyed. This makes the following derivations much
more cumbersome. In the remainder of this paper, we use
the assumptions in Corollary 1 to facilitate the design of the
reverse sampler.
Recall that the first challenge comes from the integral oper-
ation. During training, performing high-dimensional numerical
integration for every data sample is time-consuming. Our
goal is to derive an analytical expression for
R
∥v∥>ϵ p(xt +
v|x0)νt(dv). According to Proposition 3, p(xt|x0) is the
distribution of an RV composed of a bias term, a Gaussian
RV, and a stable RV, which are mutually independent. Due
to the general lack of an analytical PDF for the α-stable
distribution, it is challenging to obtain an explicit expression
for p(xt|x0). Therefore, PDF approximation is needed to
facilitate the following analysis.


7
Let XB ∼N(0, 2γ2
g) and XS ∼S(α, 0, γs, 0) be mutually
independent. Denote the PDFs of XB and XS by fXB(x) and
fXS(x), respectively. Then, the exact PDF of XM ≜XB+XS
equals the convolution of fXB(x) and fXS(x). Unfortunately,
there is no general explicit expression for fXM (x). In [23], an
approximate PDF is proposed to describe the statistical model
of XM. It can be regarded as a weighted sum of a Gaussian
kernel and a tail component. Specifically,
fXM (x) ≈˜fXM (x) = 1
k1

c1g0 exp

−x2
4γ2g

+
αγsCα
c2 + |x|α+1

,
(30)
where k1 is the normalization factor. The parameter c2 ≥0
is used to avoid singularity at the origin and control the
shape of the tail component. The parameters γg and γs
represent the scaling parameters of the Gaussian kernel and
the tail component, respectively. The quantities g0 and Cα are
expressed by the above parameters in closed form. It has been
shown in [23] that ˜fXM (x) can accurately model XM under
various scenarios.
The tail component in (30) is derived from the asymptotic
behavior of the α-stable distribution [23], [24]. Following
a similar procedure, (30) can also be extended to high-
dimensional cases [25]. For example, let XB ∼N(0, σ2I),
XS =
√
AXG, and XM = XB + XS. Here, we consider
the sub-Gaussian representation of the multivariate isotropic
stable distribution, where A follows a right-skewed α-stable
distribution [24]. Note that the characteristic function of XM
is ϕXM (l) = exp(−γ2
g∥l∥2−γα
s ∥l∥α). Then, the PDF of XM
can be similarly approximated as [25]
˜fXM (x) = 1
k2

c1g0 exp

−∥x∥2
4γ2g

+ α2α−1Γ( α+D
2
)γα
s
πD/2Γ(1 −α
2 ) (c2 + ∥x∥2)−α+D
2

(31)
where k2 denotes the normalization factor.
With (31), the target in (26) can be further derived.
Since p(xt|x0,j) is independent of dv, we focus only on
R
∥v∥>ϵ p(xt + v|x0)νt(dv) in the sequel. For notational
simplicity, we derive explicit expressions for the following
integrals:
P1(ϵ) ≜
Z
∥v∥>ϵ
exp(−∥v + µ∥2)νt(dv)
(32)
P2(ϵ) ≜
Z
∥v∥>ϵ
(c2 + ∥v + µ∥2)−α+D
2 νt(dv)
(33)
Note that µ is introduced only to characterize the mismatch
between p(xt + v|x0) and the L´evy measure. Moreover, the
scaling parameter γg is omitted in (32) for brevity. It does
not denote the mean of Xt. Direct numerical integration
is infeasible in high-dimensional settings. To address this
issue, we transform P1(ϵ) and P2(ϵ) into polar coordinates
as follows:
P1(ϵ) =2π
D−1
2 CD,α,σS
Γ( D−1
2 )
Z +∞
ϵ
Z 1
−1
exp(−(r2 + ∥µ∥2
+ 2rz∥µ∥))r−α−1(1 −z2)
D−3
2 dzdr
(34)
P2(ϵ) =2π
D−1
2 CD,α,σS
Γ( D−1
2 )
Z +∞
ϵ
Z 1
−1
(c2 + r2 + ∥µ∥2
+ 2rz∥µ∥)−α+D
2 r−α−1(1 −z2)
D−3
2 dzdr
(35)
which does not admit a closed-form expression in general.
However, the original integral has been significantly simplified
into a two-dimensional integral. In fact, the inner integral with
respect to z in (32) and (33) can be further simplified. First,
we need the following two integral identities [26]:
Z 1
−1
exp(ax)(1 −x2)pdx
=√πΓ(p + 1)(2a−1)
p+1
2 I p+1
2 (a),
(36)
Z 1
0
xa−1(1 −x)b−a−1(1 −zx)−cdx
=B(a, b −a) 2F 1(c, a; b; z), b > a > 0
(37)
where Ia(x) denotes the modified Bessel function of the first
kind and B(·) denotes the Beta function. For P1(ϵ), applying
(36) yields
P1(ϵ) =2π
D
2 CD,α,σS∥µ∥
2−D
2
exp(−∥µ∥2)
×
Z +∞
ϵ
exp(−r2)r−α−D
2 I D−2
2 (2r∥µ∥)dr
(38)
For P2(ϵ), we use the variable transformation x = 2t −1.
After some manipulations, (39) can be obtained. In this way,
calculating the total jump rate λ(xt|x0,j) reduces to evaluating
a one-dimensional integral, which significantly decreases the
computational complexity compared to D-dimensional inte-
grals.
D. High-dimensional sampling
As for the second problem, numerical sampling algorithms
such as Hamiltonian Monte Carlo (HMC) can be applied, as
the PDF and its gradient information are available. However,
reverse sampling of the SDE is still slow due to the cold-start
problem. Specifically, for each reverse sampling iteration with
sufficiently small ∆t, only one sample is needed for a large
jump if it occurs. However, the target sampling distribution
varies with t. In this case, the HMC sampler should be
“retrained” repeatedly to reach the steady state of the dynamic
system, which is quite inefficient.
Then, we design the fast sampling method for the large
jump. Recall that the normalized target distribution is
˜q(xt, v) ≜p(xt + v)νt(dv)
Qt,ϵ
≈
PN
j=1 p(xt + v|x0,j)νt(dv)
NQt,ϵ
(40)
where we define Qt,ϵ =
R
∥v∥>ϵ p(xt + v)νt(dv). Note that
p(xt) is omitted because it is not related to v, and our objective
is to generate a sample from the distribution with respect to
v.
Different from the one-dimensional case, we sample from
˜q(xt, v) under polar coordinates. First, we rewrite ˜q(xt, v)


8
P2(ϵ) =CD,α,σSπ
D−1
2 2D−1B( D−1
2 , D−1
2 )
Γ( D−1
2 )
Z +∞
ϵ
r−α−1
2F 1( α+D
2
, D−1
2 ; D −1; −
4r∥µ∥
c2+r2+∥µ∥2−2r∥µ∥)
(c2 + r2 + ∥µ∥2 −2r∥µ∥)
α+D
2
dr
(39)
as ˜q(xt, r, z, θ), where r ≜∥v∥, z ≜
⟨µ,v⟩
∥µ∥∥v∥, and θ ∈RD−2
represents the remaining angular variables. Then, ˜q(xt, v) can
be rewritten as in (44), where µ is defined as before and
incorporates the information of xt. We then need to sample r,
z, and θ from the joint distribution ˜q(xt, r, z, θ). Given r and
z, θ can be generated uniformly on the sphere orthogonal to
the direction represented by z. Therefore, θ does not explicitly
appear in the PDF. Based on this observation, we omit θ in
˜q(xt, r, z, θ) for simplicity.
Note that the derivations of the marginal distributions are
the same as those of P1(ϵ) and P2(ϵ). Hence, the previous
lookup tables can be directly used for fast sampling based on
inverse CDF methods. In other words, we can first sample
r from the marginal distribution ˜q(xt, r) and then sample z
from ˜q(z|xt, r). To distinguish the distribution under polar
coordinates from ˜q(xt, v), we denote the CDFs of ˜q(xt, r)
and ˜q(z|xt, r) by F˜q,(r,t)(·) and F˜q,z|(r,t)(·), respectively, in
the sequel.
However, even if P1(x) and P2(x) with x ∈[ϵ, M] and
a large constant M can be precomputed and stored in the
lookup table, the inference stage is still time-consuming. This
is because, for each pair (r, F˜q,(r,t)(·)), the corresponding
conditional pair (r, F˜q(|),(r,t)(·)) needs to be obtained N times.
This complexity can be considerably reduced by another
simple sampling step. Indeed, Qt,ϵ can be decomposed as
Qt,ϵ = 1
N
N
X
j=1
Z
∥v∥>ϵ
p(xt + v|x0,j)νt(dv) ≜1
N
N
X
j=1
Qt,ϵ,j
(41)
Based on (40), ˜q(xt, v) can be rewritten as follows:
˜q(xt, v) =
PN
j=1 p(xt + v|x0,j)νt(dv)
PN
j=1 Qt,ϵ,j
=
PN
j=1 Qt,ϵ,j ˜q(xt, v|x0,j)
PN
j=1 Qt,ϵ,j
≜
N
X
j=1
gQ(x0,j|xt, t)˜q(xt, v|x0,j)
(42)
where we define the weighted distribution gQ(x|xt, t) as
gQ(x|xt, t) =
N
X
j=1
1{x0,j}(x)Qt,ϵ,j
PN
j=1 Qt,ϵ,j
(43)
In this case, ˜q(xt, v) can be regarded as a mixture dis-
tribution of the conditional distributions ˜q(xt, v|x0,j). Then,
˜q(xt, v) is equivalent to a distribution controlled by an under-
lying Markov process. Based on the above observation, we first
randomly choose a data sample x∗
0 ∈{x0,j, j = 1, · · · , N}
according to the distribution gQ(x|xt, t). Then, we generate a
sample from the distribution conditioned on x∗
0. In this way,
we only need to focus on the conditional distribution ˜q(xt|x∗
0)
and obtain the pair (r, F˜q(|),(r,t)(·)) only once. This is much
faster than directly sampling from ˜q(xt, v).
To obtain the complete gQ(x|xt, t), all Qt,ϵ,j with j =
1, · · · , N should be computed. This is equivalent to searching
the lookup table N times. In fact, many Qt,ϵ,j may be
rather small, and their influence can be neglected. Therefore,
instead of constructing the complete gQ(x|xt, t), we truncate
gQ(x|xt, t) by choosing the K samples with the largest
approximate mixture weights, or equivalently the largest Qt,ϵ,j
in the prior sampler. This operation is reasonable because the
contribution of x0,j is determined by the overlap between the
conditional density p(xt+v|x0,j) and the truncated L´evy mea-
sure. In the isotropic case, νt(dv) ∝∥v∥−D−αdv. After trun-
cation, it favors jumps with ∥v∥close to ϵ. Therefore, Qt,ϵ,j
is large only when the high-density region of p(xt + v|x0,j)
intersects the L´evy-favored shell around xt. This motivates a
top-K approximation that keeps only the candidates with the
largest approximate Qt,ϵ,j and renormalizes their weights. For
convenience, we denote the index set by K and the truncated
version of gQ(x|xt, t) by ˜gQ(x).
Remark 4: If we choose the largest K elements from all
Qt,ϵ,j via the trivial traversal, the complexity still remains
O(N). To solve this problem, more advanced and efficient
ordering algorithms can be utilized, such as approximate
nearest-neighbor (ANN) methods.
In addition to the inverse CDF method, rejection sampling
can also be efficient for sampling the radial variable r based
on (44). This converts the original D-dimensional sampling
problem into two one-dimensional sampling steps and one
remaining direction sampling step. Since (44) has an analytical
PDF expression with explicit asymptotic behavior, the pro-
posal distribution for sampling r can be chosen as a Student’s
t-distribution with 2α + D degrees of freedom. This choice
matches the tail behavior of the marginal distribution induced
by (44). Note that marginalization with respect to z does
not change the tail order of the distribution in terms of r.
Its closed-form expression has been analyzed in (34)∼(39).
For z, rejection sampling is not necessary, since the proposal
distribution is not straightforward to design due to the bounded
domain, and the corresponding lookup table is quite small.
Finally, the overall training procedure, the large jump sam-
pling method, and the complete reverse sampling algorithm
are summarized in Algorithm 1, Algorithm 2, and Algorithm
3, respectively. Note that complete reverse sampling starts
from samples generated from the terminal prior distribution
ptp(x). In our setting, ptp(x) is the convolution of a mul-
tivariate Gaussian distribution and a stable distribution. The
corresponding samples can be generated separately from these
two distributions. Here, if we set s̸ = 0, the mean of ptp(x)
is −s
R0 . Without loss of generality, we can also set s = 0 so
that ptp(x) is symmetric about the origin.


9
˜q(xt, r, z, θ) ∝
c1g0
k2
exp

−
1
4γ2g
(r2 + ∥µ∥2 + 2rz∥µ∥)

+ α2α−1Γ( α+D
2
)γα
s
k2πD/2Γ(1 −α
2 ) (c2 + r2 + ∥µ∥2 + 2rz∥µ∥)−α+D
2

× r−α−1(1 −z2)
D−3
2 , r > ϵ, z ∈[−1, 1],
(44)
Remark 5: In Algorithm 2, we only consider the case where
µt̸ = 0 and D ≥3. If µt = 0, the conditional density
is radially symmetric. Therefore, we only need to sample r.
When D = 1, 2, the sampling procedure can be significantly
simplified. For example, when D = 1, the orthogonal direction
does not exist, and only r needs to be sampled.
Remark 6: We emphasize that the generator-based reverse
characterization is stated at the level of L´evy-driven Markov
processes, whereas the computational sampler developed in
this paper is derived under additional structural assumptions.
In particular, the practical algorithm focuses on isotropic linear
L´evy SDEs with symmetric α-stable jump measures, for which
the conditional transition density, jump rate approximation,
and polar coordinate sampling procedure can be implemented
efficiently. This distinction allows us to retain the general
insight provided by the reversed generator while avoiding an
overstatement of the scope of the proposed numerical sampler.
Algorithm 1 Training algorithm
Input: Dataset x0,j, j = 1, · · · , N and the training epoch
Nepoch.
Output: Well-trained networks sθ1(·) and gθ2(·).
1: # Training of sθ1(·):
2:
Use the dataset to optimize θ1 via standard denoising
score matching.
3: # Training of gθ2(·):
4:
k ←1.
5:
while k ≤Nepoch do
6:
Sample t ∼U(0, 1).
7:
Calculate the bias and scaling parameters of the
Gaussian and stable RVs used to describe xt based on
(27)∼(29).
8:
Calculate the target based on (26), (38), and (39).
9:
Optimize θ2 by stochastic gradient descent based on
(26).
10:
k ←k + 1.
11:
end while
It should be remarked that for the large jump component, we
should theoretically sample the number of jumps from N >ϵ
t
∼
Poisson
 gθ2(xt, t)∆t

. If N >ϵ
t
> 0, independently generate
jump amplitudes V >ϵ
t,ℓ, ℓ= 1, . . . , N >ϵ
t
. Then the large jump
contribution is X>ϵ
t,∆t = PN>ϵ
t
ℓ=1 V >ϵ
t,ℓ. In practice, one may
further approximate the compound Poisson update by allowing
at most one large jump within each time step. Let Λ(xt, t) =
λ(xt, t)∆t. The probability of two or more large jumps in the
same interval is
Pr
 N >ϵ
t
≥2

=1 −e−Λ(xt,t) (1 + Λ(xt, t))
≤Λ(xt, t)2
2
(45)
Algorithm 2 Sampling algorithm for large jumps
Input: xt, x∗
0, lookup tables containing (r, F˜q,(r,t)(·)) and
(z, F˜q,z|(r,t)(·)).
Output: Large jump sample ω.
1: µt ←xt −µ(t, x∗
0), where µ(t, x∗
0) is given in (27).
2: ˘µt ←
µt
∥µt∥.
3: Sample u1, u2 ∼U(0, 1) and u3 ∼N(0, ID).
4: r ←F −1
˜q,(r,t)(u1), or equivalently, apply rejection sampling
based on ˜q(xt, r) with Student’s t-distribution as the
proposal distribution.
5: z ←F −1
˜q,z|(r,t)(u2).
6: u3 ←u3 −⟨˘µt, u3⟩˘µt.
7: ˘u3 ←
u3
∥u3∥.
8: ω ←rz ˘µt + r
√
1 −z2 ˘u3.
Therefore, the single jump approximation introduces an
additional error of order
Emulti = O

sup
t,xt
λ(xt, t)2∆t2

,
(46)
provided that λ(xt, t)∆t is uniformly small.
E. Approximate observation-guided sampler
Posterior sampling for the diffusion process can be derived
straightforwardly based on Bayes’ rule, i.e., ∇log p(xt|y) =
∇log p(y|xt) + ∇log p(xt). The score function is approxi-
mated by the output of the neural network, and the likelihood
is obtained by approximating p(y|xt) with p(y|E[ˆx0|xt])
[27].
However, a similar strategy is not directly applicable to the
jump component because the reversed jump kernel involves
a nonlocal density ratio. Exact posterior sampling for L´evy-
driven SDEs is therefore considerably more challenging. In
principle, the large jump rate should be replaced by the
posterior large jump rate, which requires likelihood-reweighted
integration over the empirical mixture at each reverse step.
This computation is rather expensive, especially because the
integral cannot be simplified in general.
In this work, we therefore use the prior-trained rate network
as an amortized proposal rate for large jump events in the
posterior sampler. This approximation means that the prior rate
network is not interpreted as the exact posterior rate. Instead,
it provides a computationally efficient proposal mechanism
for deciding when nonlocal transitions are proposed. The
observation information is then incorporated into the large
jump amplitude and direction through likelihood-reweighted
empirical mixture weights. This design prioritizes the posterior
correction of the jump destination, which has a direct impact
on the nonlocal transition once a large jump is triggered, while


10
Algorithm 3 Total reverse sampling algorithm
Input: xT,j
∼
ptp(x), j
=
1, · · · , N,
well-trained
networks
sθ1(·)
and
gθ2(·),
weighted
distribution
gQ(x|xt, t), lookup tables containing (r, F˜q,(r,t)(·)) and
(z, F˜q,z|(r,t)(·)), and time step size ∆t.
Output: Reversed samples x0,j, j = 1, · · · , N.
1: j ←1.
2: while j ≤N do
3:
t ←T.
4:
while t > 0 do
5:
# Score-based update:
6:
Sample ξ1, ξ2 ∼N(0, ID).
7:
˜xt,j ←xt,j + (−b(xt,j) + Σ(t)sθ1(xt,j, t))∆t +
ΦG(t)
√
∆tξ1.
8:
# Large jump generation:
9:
λ(xt,j) ←gθ2(xt,j, t).
10:
Sample β ∼U(0, 1).
11:
if β < 1 −exp(−λ(xt,j)∆t) then
12:
Randomly choose a sample x∗
0 from the dataset
according to the truncated weighted distribution ˜gQ(x).
13:
Obtain a jump sample ω from Algorithm 2 using
xt,j, x∗
0, and the lookup tables.
14:
else
15:
ω ←0.
16:
end if
17:
˜xt,j ←˜xt,j + ω.
18:
# Small jump generation:
19:
Calculate the drift b≤ϵ
t,∆t in (8) and the scaling
parameter Σ≤ϵ
t,∆t in (15).
20:
xt−∆t,j ←˜xt,j + b≤ϵ
t,∆t∆t +
√
∆t(Σ≤ϵ
t,∆t)
1
2 ξ2.
21:
t ←t −∆t.
22:
end while
23:
j ←j + 1.
24: end while
avoiding the high cost of recomputing the exact posterior jump
rate at every reverse step.
In the experiments, we will evaluate its effect by comparing
the prior proposal rate with the likelihood-reweighted poste-
rior rate approximation and by examining the sensitivity of
the final estimation performance to the jump-rate choice. In
the following proposition, we analyze how the observation
modifies the empirical mixture weights used for large jump
amplitude sampling.
Proposition 4: Let y be the observations used for pos-
terior sampling of the forward SDE (1). Assume that
the observation depends on the clean state X0 only, i.e.,
pY |X0,Xt(y|x0, xt) = pY |X0(y|x0). Then, the weighted dis-
tribution gQ(x|xt, t) used for generating large jump samples
should be replaced by
gposterior,Q(x) =
N
X
j=1
1{x0,j}(x)pY |X0(y|x0,j)Qt,ϵ,j
PN
j=1 pY |X0(y|x0,j)Qt,ϵ,j
(47)
Proof: The proof is relegated to Appendix C.
Note that the likelihood can usually be efficiently ob-
tained from the transition function between x0 and y. For
instance, this transition function is the channel model for
communication tasks. Proposition 4 shows that the large jump
amplitude sampler can be adapted to the observation-guided
setting by modifying the empirical mixture weights. Similarly,
gposterior,Q(x) can also be truncated to reduce the inference
latency.
V. NUMERICAL RESULTS
In this section, several numerical experiments are provided
to validate the advantages of the proposed inverse sampler. We
consider channel estimation for OFDM-SISO systems under
mixed noise.
For the channel model, we consider a frequency-selective
SISO-OFDM channel modeled by a tapped-delay-line (TDL)
response. The path gains are modeled as independent cir-
cularly symmetric complex Gaussian random variables with
prescribed average powers. Moreover, the delay-power profiles
from 3GPP TR 38.901 are used. Due to space limitations, we
choose the TDL-A, TDL-C, and TDL-D delay-power profiles
as representative scenarios. The mixed channel noise consists
of WGN and IN described by the SαS distribution. They
are mutually independent and memoryless. Let their scaling
parameters be γg and γs, respectively. Then, the generalized
signal-to-noise ratio (GSNR) is defined as follows:
GSNR(dB) = 10 log10
Ps
2(γ2g + γ2s),
(48)
where Ps is the transmit signal power.
For the baselines, we consider existing model-based algo-
rithms and generative methods, including:
• Linear minimum mean square error (LMMSE):
LMMSE is an efficient channel estimation method un-
der WGN. However, its performance and stability may
deteriorate considerably in mixed-noise scenarios due to
impulsive outliers.
• Clipped LMMSE: Clipped LMMSE first suppresses
large-amplitude pilot observations through clipping and
then applies the conventional LMMSE estimator. This
simple preprocessing improves the robustness of LMMSE
against IN while retaining low computational complexity.
• Clipped orthogonal matching pursuit (OMP) [28]:
OMP iteratively selects dominant delay atoms from
a common candidate dictionary and reconstructs the
frequency-domain channel. Clipped OMP is a clipped
version of OMP for scenarios with mixed noise.
• Clipped sparse Bayesian learning (SBL): SBL esti-
mates the delay-domain sparse channel by learning the
hyperparameters that reflect the sparsity. Clipped SBL is
a clipped version of conventional SBL.
• Outlier-aware SBL [29], [30]: Different from Clipped
SBL, outlier-aware SBL explicitly models the received
pilot observations as the sum of a sparse delay-domain
channel component, a sparse outlier component, and
Gaussian background noise. By jointly estimating the
channel and the impulsive outliers, this method is de-
signed for mixed Gaussian and IN environments.
• Diffusion method [15]: This method uses a genera-
tive model based on the diffusion forward process and


11
(a)
(b)
(c)
Fig. 1. Training loss, test loss, and accuracy validation of jump rate prediction using the proposed lightweight neural network under different values of α.
(a) Comparison of training and test losses; (b) Comparison of jump rates for α = 1.2; (c) Comparison of jump rates for α = 1.8.
posterior inverse inference. Different from the proposed
framework, it does not introduce the jump process and
uses only the local score function to recover the target
distribution.
• L´evy-DSM [19]: This method is based on the inverse
sampler designed for the L´evy process under the DSM
framework. It shows that the network can be trained to
regress noise following α-stable distributions to achieve
inverse sampling.
• Benchmark: The benchmark is a genie-aided LMMSE
estimator under WGN with known true delay support.
It uses ideal prior delay information that is unavailable
to practical estimators. Therefore, it serves as an NMSE
reference for the achievable estimation performance.
Finally, the other parameter configurations are as follows:
the number of subcarriers is Nc = 64; the number of OFDM
symbols per frame is Nt = 16; the pilot pattern is “comb”;
the pilot spacing is 4 or 8; the modulation scheme is QPSK;
and the number of paths, path delays, and path powers follow
TDL-A/C/D. The pilot spacing is set to either 4 or 8 to validate
the performance under different pilot densities.
A. Structure and training of network gθ2
Since the large jump rate is a scalar statistical quantity,
a lightweight neural network is sufficient for its amortized
estimation. Specifically, we parameterize gθ2(xt, t) by a con-
volutional neural network (CNN) and a multilayer perceptron
(MLP). Its input is the normalized state xt concatenated with
a time embedding of t. To ensure the nonnegativity of the es-
timated jump rate, the final output is passed through a softplus
activation. Compared with ReLU, softplus provides a smoother
parameterization and avoids permanently inactive zero-rate
outputs. In our implementation, the network is trained by
minimizing the mean square error (MSE) between its output
and λ(xt|x0). Note that the original sample x0 is only used
to construct the conditional training target. It is not fed into
the network as input because an accurate x0 is not available
at the inference stage.
For the OFDM channel estimation task, the complex-valued
state is first represented by its real and imaginary parts.
For example, when one frame contains Nt OFDM symbols
and Nc subcarriers, we reshape the state into a two-channel
tensor Xt ∈R2×Nt×Nc. The rate network adopts a small
convolutional architecture to exploit the local time-frequency
structure while keeping the number of trainable parameters
low. Specifically, it consists of four 3 × 3 convolutional layers
with channel widths {16, 16, 32, 32}, respectively, followed
by a global average pooling layer. The pooled feature is
concatenated with the time embedding and then passed to a
two-layer MLP head to produce a scalar output. The estimated
large jump rate is given by
gθ2(xt, t) =softplus(MLPθ2([GAP(CNNθ2(Xt)), Emb(t)))
+ λϵ,
(49)
where GAP(·) denotes global average pooling, Emb(t) is
the time embedding, and λϵ > 0 is a small constant for
numerical stability. For Nt = 16 and Nc = 64, this small
CNN contains approximately 2 × 104 trainable parameters.
This is much smaller than directly parameterizing the whole
reverse transition with a neural network.
The MSE loss between the accurate rate and the network
output is shown in Fig. 1. Fig. 1b and Fig. 1c present the
results of 1000 experiments, where the time instant and data
sample x0 are chosen randomly. These 1000 tests are then
sorted according to their accurate jump rates. For validation,
the reference large jump rate is computed using the empirical
marginal expression in (23), rather than a single conditional
target λ(xt|x0). From Fig. 1a, it can be observed that the
neural network converges very fast and only requires about 60
epochs with different values of α. Moreover, the network can
accurately estimate the jump rate under different impulsiveness
levels.
B. Various channel configurations
Here, we investigate the channel estimation performance
under various α. First, the channel estimation accuracy and
the corresponding detection performance are compared. We
use normalized mean square error (NMSE) and bit error rate
(BER) as the criteria. The experimental results are presented
in Fig. 2 and Fig. 3.


12
(a) NMSE, TDL-A, α = 1.2
(b) BER, TDL-A, α = 1.2
(c) NMSE, TDL-C, α = 1.2
(d) BER, TDL-C, α = 1.2
(e) NMSE, TDL-D, α = 1.2
(f) BER, TDL-D, α = 1.2
Fig. 2. NMSE and BER comparisons of channel estimation under different
scenarios (TDL-A/C/D) with α = 1.2.
In general, the proposed approach achieves the best per-
formance among the baselines in terms of both NMSE and
BER. For “Clipped LMMSE”, “Clipped SBL”, and “Clipped
OMP”, the clipping operation suppresses most IN samples
and thus improves robustness. However, clipping also distorts
the transmitted signals, especially in the high-GSNR regime.
Therefore, these three methods show a lower NMSE decay
rate as the GSNR continues to increase. “Outlier-aware SBL”
has better robustness under mixed channel noise because it ex-
plicitly considers the influence of IN samples. However, it can
only achieve an accurate estimation at the pilot locations. For
learning-based methods, both “Score-based” and “Proposed”
learn the statistical structure of the channel model and thus
achieve better estimation accuracy in various scenarios. Com-
pared with the “Score-based” algorithm, the proposed method
is more likely to reach a better performance because it allows
large jumps to enable nonlocal transitions between distant
high-probability regions. In contrast, “Score-based” only uses
gradient information and small step sizes for optimization. As
a result, it may get trapped in local optima, especially when
the channel model is more complicated. Finally, the proposed
method is also more robust and stable compared to the “L´evy-
DSM”, which is consistent with the above analyses.
Fig. 3 presents the estimation results under different im-
pulsiveness levels. When α = 1.2, there are multiple outliers
with large amplitudes, and the channel becomes much more
complex. In this case, the proposed approach is not only robust
but also achieves a larger performance gain compared with the
cases with larger α. However, when α is close to 2 and the
impulsiveness is very weak, the existing baselines also show
comparable performance. This is consistent with the above
analysis.
(a) NMSE, TDL-C, α = 1.8
(b) BER, TDL-C, α = 1.8
Fig. 3. NMSE and BER comparisons of channel estimation with TDL-C as
the delay-power profile and α = 1.8.
C. Ablations
Ablation studies are conducted to explore the influence from
the approximation of the forward noise distribution, the top-K
truncation and the approximated posterior jump rate.
During the design of the inverse sampler, the distribution of
the forward mixed noise at arbitrary time instants is required.
However, there is no exact closed-form PDF expression for the
impulsive component or the mixed noise. To avoid numerical
integration, we use the approximated PDF of the mixed noise
given in (30) and (31). The following experiments demonstrate
the effectiveness of this approximation. We still use channel
estimation as the application.
In Fig. 4, Fig. 5 and Fig. 6, we separately focus on the
effects of noise distribution approximation, top-K truncation
and large jump rate approximation. The time consumption is
shown in Table I, using a CPU configuration of ‘12th Gen
Intel(R) Core(TM) i9-12900H’. It can be observed that using
the accurate PDF does not bring a considerable performance
gain, while the complexity of “Accurate PDF” is unacceptable.
This is because the distribution needs to be calculated by
numerical integration at every step. More importantly, even
though the high-dimensional PDF can be transformed into
polar coordinates, the integral is still challenging to further
simplify. This remains time-consuming when a high resolution
is required to ensure accuracy.
Then, the approximation error introduced by the top-K
truncation is examined. For the benchmark, we set K equal
to the total number of samples used for training. Here, for the
truncation scheme, we set K as 10% of the total number of
training samples. Similar to the noise model approximation,
the truncation error is also not significant. This is because, for
a given time instant and sample xt, the probability that most
original data samples generate xt is quite small. Therefore, the


13
influence of these samples on jump generation is negligible.
As a result, K can be much smaller than the total number of
samples, which reduces redundancy and improves efficiency.
Finally, Fig. 6 implies that the posterior inverse sampling
based on the exact large jump rate achieves a better NMSE.
However, its computational cost significantly increases since
the jump rate calculation needs to rely on the numerical
integral. Moreover, in terms of detection error probability, the
performance gain is less considerable than that with respect to
NMSE. This result supports that using prior large jump rate
is an efficient scheme.
In summary, the approximation operations in the inverse
sampling algorithm achieve a tradeoff between perfor-
mance and complexity.
(a) NMSE
(b) BER
Fig. 4.
Ablation results compared with the accurate mixed noise PDF in
terms of NMSE and BER.
(a) NMSE
(b) BER
Fig. 5.
Ablation results compared with the no-truncation case in terms of
NMSE and BER.
-10
-5
0
5
10
15
20
25
GSNR (dB)
10-2
10-1
100
NMSE
Accurate
Approximated rate
(a) NMSE
-10
-5
0
5
10
15
20
25
GSNR (dB)
10-2
10-1
100
BER
Accurate
Approximated rate
(b) BER
Fig. 6. Ablation results compared with the accurate posterior large jump rate
in terms of NMSE and BER.
TABLE I
TIME CONSUMPTION COMPARISON OF SIMULATIONS IN FIG. 4∼6 UNDER
DIFFERENT VALUES OF α.
Algorithms/Scenarios
α = 1.2
α = 1.8
Proposed
5.6s
5.5s
Accurate PDF
1717.6s
1698.4s
No truncation
52.7s
54.1s
Accurate rate
6125.3s
6379.6s
VI. CONCLUSIONS
In this paper, we proposed a generator-guided inverse sam-
pling algorithm for a class of isotropic linear L´evy-driven
SDEs with symmetric α-stable jump components. We first
derived the expression of the backward generator and used
it to decompose the full reverse sampling process into the
diffusion part and the jump components. Then, by theoretically
analyzing the inverse sampling process from a statistical
perspective, we determined the objective that can be learned
by a lightweight network. We also designed an efficient reverse
sampling method by introducing several efficient approxi-
mation operations. As an application, the proposed inverse
sampling algorithm outperformed the considered baselines in
channel estimation under mixed channel noise across different
scenarios. Moreover, numerical results showed that the pro-
posed approach achieves a good balance between performance
and complexity.
APPENDIX A
PROOF OF PROPOSITION 1
For a L´evy process with infinite activity, the generator
associated with the test function f is given by
(LJ,F f)(xt) = bϵ
J,F (xt, t) · ∇f(xt)
+
Z
RD
 f(xt + v) −f(xt) −1{v:∥v∥≤ϵ}v · ∇f(xt)

νt(dv)
(A.1)
where bϵ
J,F (xt, t) is the canonical drift induced by dLt. For
the isotropic case, we have bϵ
J,F (xt, t) = 0. By substituting
(A.1) into (2), the complete forward generator is obtained as
(LF f) (xt) = bϵ
F (xt, t) · ∇f(xt) + 1
2Tr
 Σ(t)∇2f(xt)

+
Z
RD
 f(xt + v) −f(xt) −1{v:∥v∥≤ϵ}v · ∇f(xt)

νt(dv)
(A.2)
with bϵ
F (xt, t) = b(xt, t) + bϵ
J,F (xt, t). Next, time reversal is
applied to derive the backward generator. Based on [31], the
forward and backward jump kernels satisfy the flux equation
p(xt)
←
Kt,xt(dv) = p(xt + v)
→
Kt,xt+v(d(−v))
(A.3)


14
which means that the jump density from xt to xt+v should be
equal to that from xt +v back to xt. Moreover, the backward
canonical drift satisfies [31]
bϵ
J,F (xt, t) + bϵ
J,B(xt, t)
=
Z
RD 1{v:∥v∥≤ϵ}v
 →
Kt,xt(dv) +
←
Kt,xt(dv)

(A.4)
Therefore, we have
←
Kt,xt(dv) =p(xt + v)
p(xt)⃗
Kt,xt+v (d (−v))
=p(xt + v)
p(xt)
νt(d(−v))
(A.5)
In this case, the backward generator of the L´evy process is
given by
(LJ,Bf)(xt)
=bϵ
J,B(xt, t) · ∇f(xt) +
Z
RD
 f(xt + v) −f(xt)
−1{v:∥v∥≤ϵ}v · ∇f(xt)
 ←
Kt,xt(dv)
=

−bϵ
J,F (xt, t) +
Z
RD 1{v:∥v∥≤ϵ}v ·

νt(dv)
+
←
Kt,xt(dv)

· ∇f(xt) +
Z
RD
 f(xt + v) −f(xt)
−1{v:∥v∥≤ϵ}v · ∇f(xt)
 ←
Kt,xt(dv)
=

−bϵ
J,F (xt, t) + p. v.
Z
RD 1{v:∥v∥≤ϵ}vνt(dv)

· ∇f(xt)
+ p. v.
Z
RD (f(xt + v) −f(xt)) p(xt + v)
p(xt)
νt(dv) (A.6)
Combining (A.2) with the time reversal of the diffusion part,
the complete backward generator is given by
(LBf) (xt) =
 −b(xt, t) + Σ(t)∇log p(xt)

· ∇f(xt)
+ 1
2Tr
 Σ(t)∇2f(xt)

+ (LJ,Bf)(xt) (A.7)
Finally, if the scaled L´evy measure νt is symmetric, we
have νt(d(−v)) = νt(dv). For the symmetric α-stable case,
the canonical jump drift vanishes. This further simplifies the
backward generator and completes the proof.
APPENDIX B
PROOF OF PROPOSITION 3
We first use a variable transformation to absorb the drift
term. Let Yt = exp(−Rt)Xt. Based on Ito’s formula,
dYt = exp(−Rt)dXt + d(exp(−Rt))Xt
= exp(−Rt)dXt −R exp(−Rt)Xt
= exp(−Rt)(sdt + ΦG(t)dWt + ΦS(t)dLt)
(B.1)
According to Yt = exp(−Rt)Xt,
Xt = exp(Rt)X0 + exp(Rt)
Z t
0
exp(−Rl)sdl
|
{z
}
µ(t,x0)
+
Z t
0
exp((t −l)R)ΦG(l)dWl
|
{z
}
G(t)
+
Z t
0
exp((t −l)R)ΦS(l)dLl
|
{z
}
S(t)
(B.2)
Then, based on the linearity of Gaussian RV and α-stable
RV, the proof is completed.
APPENDIX C
PROOF OF PROPOSITION 4
First, we have p(xt+v|y)
p(xt|y) νt(dv) = p(xt+v,y)
p(xt,y) νt(dv). Since
the denominator is independent of v, it can be omitted
during sampling. For clarity, we add subscripts to indicate the
arguments of the distributions. The target sampling distribution
is given by
Z
∥v∥>ϵ
pXt,Y (xt + v, y)νt(dv)
∝
Z
∥v∥>ϵ
pY |Xt(y|xt + v)pXt(xt + v)∥v∥−α−Ddv
=
Z
∥u−xt∥>ϵ
pY |Xt(y|u)pXt(u)∥u −xt∥−α−Ddu
=
Z
∥u−xt∥>ϵ
Z
RD pY |X0(y|x0)pX0|Xt(x0|u)dx0pXt(u)
× ∥u −xt∥−α−Ddu
=
Z
∥u−xt∥>ϵ
Z
RD pY |X0(y|x0)pXt|X0(u|x0)pX0(x0)dx0
× ∥u −xt∥−α−Ddu
≈
Z
∥u−xt∥>ϵ
1
N
N
X
j=1
pY |X0(y|x0,j)pXt|X0(u|x0,j)
× ∥u −xt∥−α−Ddu
∝
Z
∥v∥>ϵ
1
N
N
X
j=1
pY |X0(y|x0,j)pXt|X0(v + xt|x0,j)νt(dv)
(C.1)
By introducing the normalization factors and following
procedures similar to those in (41) and (42), we can deduce
that the target sampling distribution can also be decomposed
into the conditional distribution and the weighted distribution
gposterior,Q(x), where
gposterior,Q(x) =
N
X
j=1
1x0,j(x)pY |X0(y|x0,j)Qt,ϵ,j
PN
j=1 pY |X0(y|x0,j)Qt,ϵ,j
(C.2)


15
REFERENCES
[1] Y. Song and S. Ermon, “Generative modeling by estimating gradients
of the data distribution,” Advances in neural information processing
systems, vol. 32, 2019.
[2] J. Ho, A. Jain, and P. Abbeel, “Denoising diffusion probabilistic models,”
Advances in neural information processing systems, vol. 33, pp. 6840–
6851, 2020.
[3] Y.
Song,
J.
Sohl-Dickstein,
D.
P.
Kingma,
A.
Kumar,
S.
Ermon,
and
B.
Poole,
“Score-based
generative
modeling
through stochastic differential equations,” International Conference
on
Learning
Representations,
vol.
9,
2021.
[Online].
Available:
https://mlanthology.org/iclr/2021/song2021iclr-scorebased/
[4] P. Vincent, “A connection between score matching and denoising au-
toencoders,” Neural Computation, vol. 23, no. 7, pp. 1661–1674, Jul.
2011.
[5] J. Li and C. Wang, “Efficient diffusion posterior sampling for noisy
inverse problems,” SIAM Journal on Imaging Sciences, vol. 18, no. 2,
pp. 1468–1492, 2025.
[6] B. Kawar, M. Elad, S. Ermon, and J. Song, “Denoising diffusion
restoration models,” Advances in neural information processing systems,
vol. 35, pp. 23 593–23 606, 2022.
[7] H. Chung, B. Sim, D. Ryu, and J. C. Ye, “Improving diffusion models
for inverse problems using manifold constraints,” Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems, vol. 35, pp. 25 683–25 696, 2022.
[8] B. Song, S. M. Kwon, Z. Zhang, X. Hu, Q. Qu, and L. Shen, “Solving
inverse problems with latent diffusion models via hard data consistency,”
in International Conference on Learning Representations, vol. 2024,
2024, pp. 7624–7654.
[9] N. Zilberstein, A. Sabharwal, and S. Segarra, “Solving linear inverse
problems using higher-order annealed langevin diffusion,” IEEE Trans-
actions on Signal Processing, vol. 72, pp. 492–505, Jan. 2024.
[10] Y. Hu, E. Bell, G. Wang, and Y. Sun, “Prism: Probabilistic and
robust inverse solver with measurement-conditioned diffusion prior for
blind inverse problems,” in ICASSP 2026 - 2026 IEEE International
Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), 2026,
pp. 11 432–11 436.
[11] B. Xia, Y. Zhang, S. Wang, Y. Wang, X. Wu, Y. Tian, W. Yang, and
L. Van Gool, “Diffir: Efficient diffusion model for image restoration,”
in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international conference on computer
vision, 2023, pp. 13 095–13 105.
[12] B. Fei, Z. Lyu, L. Pan, J. Zhang, W. Yang, T. Luo, B. Zhang, and
B. Dai, “Generative diffusion prior for unified image restoration and
enhancement,” in 2023 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2023, pp. 9935–9946.
[13] Y. Chen and T. Pock, “Trainable nonlinear reaction diffusion: A flexible
framework for fast and effective image restoration,” IEEE Transactions
on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, vol. 39, no. 6, pp. 1256–
1272, Jun. 2017.
[14] O. ¨Ozdenizci and R. Legenstein, “Restoring vision in adverse weather
conditions with patch-based denoising diffusion models,” IEEE Trans-
actions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, vol. 45, no. 8,
pp. 10 346–10 357, Aug. 2023.
[15] X. Zhou, L. Liang, J. Zhang, P. Jiang, Y. Li, and S. Jin, “Generative
diffusion models for high dimensional channel estimation,” IEEE Trans-
actions on Wireless Communications, vol. 24, no. 7, pp. 5840–5854, Jul.
2025.
[16] M. Arvinte and J. I. Tamir, “Mimo channel estimation using score-based
generative models,” IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications,
vol. 22, no. 6, pp. 3698–3713, Jun. 2023.
[17] R. Li, J. Sun, and J. Xue, “Generative diffusion-based bayesian modeling
for universal channel estimation,” IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in
Communications, vol. 44, pp. 3104–3119, Dec. 2026.
[18] T. Karras, M. Aittala, T. Aila, and S. Laine, “Elucidating the design
space of diffusion-based generative models,” Advances in neural infor-
mation processing systems, vol. 35, pp. 26 565–26 577, 2022.
[19] E. B. Yoon, K. Park, S. Kim, and S. Lim, “Score-based generative
models with l´evy processes,” Advances in neural information processing
systems, vol. 36, pp. 40 694–40 707, 2023.
[20] D. Shariatian, U. Simsekli, and A. Oliviero Durmus, “Heavy-tailed
diffusion with denoising l´evy probabilistic models,” in International
Conference on Learning Representations, vol. 2025, 2025, pp. 96 991–
97 024.
[21] D. Applebaum, L´evy Processes and Stochastic Calculus, ser. Cambridge
Studies in Advanced Mathematics.
Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 2004.
[22] Y. Lipman, R. T. Q. Chen, H. Ben-Hamu, M. Nickel, and M. Le,
“Flow matching for generative modeling,” in The Eleventh International
Conference on Learning Representations, Kigali, Rwanda, 2023.
[23] G. Sureka and K. Kiasaleh, “Sub-optimum receiver architecture for
awgn channel with symmetric alpha-stable interference,” IEEE Trans.
Commun., vol. 61, no. 5, pp. 1926–1935, May. 2013.
[24] G. Samorodnitsky, M. S. T. Chapman, and Hall, Stable non-Gaussian
random processes: Stochastic models with infinite variance. New York:
Chapman & Hall, 1994.
[25] T. Qi, J. Zhang, J. Wang, and Y. Zhu, “Bursty mixed gaussian-impulsive
noise model and parameter estimation,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 73,
no. 9, pp. 8274–8288, Sept. 2025.
[26] D. Zwillinger, V. Moll, I. Gradshteyn, and I. Ryzhik, Eds., Table of
Integrals, Series, and Products (Eighth Edition).
Boston: Academic
Press, 2014.
[27] H. Chung, J. Kim, M. T. McCann, M. L. Klasky, and J. C. Ye, “Diffusion
posterior sampling for general noisy inverse problems,” in The Eleventh
International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR 2023),
Kigali, Rwanda, 2023.
[28] Z. Wang, Y. Li, C. Wang, D. Ouyang, and Y. Huang, “A-omp: An adap-
tive omp algorithm for underwater acoustic ofdm channel estimation,”
IEEE Wireless Communications Letters, vol. 10, no. 8, pp. 1761–1765,
Aug. 2021.
[29] X. Feng, J. Wang, X. Kuai, M. Zhou, H. Sun, and J. Li, “Message
passing-based impulsive noise mitigation and channel estimation for
underwater acoustic ofdm communications,” IEEE Transactions on
Vehicular Technology, vol. 71, no. 1, pp. 611–625, Jan. 2022.
[30] Z. Zhang, X. Han, W. Li, L. Wei, and J. Yin, “Robust time-correlated
sparse bayesian channel estimation for short-block underwater acoustic
communications under impulsive noise,” IEEE Wireless Communications
Letters, vol. 15, pp. 3194–3198, May. 2026.
[31] G. Conforti and C. L´eonard, “Time reversal of markov processes with
jumps under a finite entropy condition,” Stochastic Processes and their
Applications, vol. 144, pp. 85–124, Feb. 2022.
