Title: Conditioning Matters: Stabilizing Inversion and Attention in Diffusion Image Editing

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.14125v1

Published Time: Mon, 15 Jun 2026 00:30:23 GMT

Number of Pages: 30

Markdown Content:
# Conditioning Matters: Stabilizing Inversion and Attention in Diffusion Image Editing 

Zheyuan Zhan 1,2,3, Hongchen Li 3, Can Wang 1,2,3, Yinfei Ma 3

Mingzhen Huang 4, Ruoshi Bai 3, Jiawei Chen 1,2,3, Siwei Lyu 4, Defang Chen 4†

> 1

State Key Laboratory of Blockchain and Data Security, Zhejiang University 

> 2

HangZhou High-Tech Zong (Binjiang) Institute of Blockchain and Data Security 

> 3

College of Computer Science, Zhejiang University 

> 4

University at Buffalo, State University of New York 

Abstract. Inversion-based image editing offers flexible and training-free control but still struggles with inversion accuracy and the trade-off be-tween editing fidelity and background preservation. While recent meth-ods improve inversion formulations or attention interactions, the role of textual conditioning in shaping diffusion dynamics and editing behav-ior remains underexplored. We show both empirically and theoretically that the precision of textual conditioning influences inversion stability by modulating the geometry of the diffusion velocity field, while also affect-ing the consistency of cross-branch attention during editing. These effects directly impact background preservation and semantic fidelity. Build-ing on this analysis, we propose SimEdit, a conditioning-aware frame-work with two complementary components: (a) conditioning refinement ,which constructs conditioning signals with improved semantic precision and structural alignment to facilitate stable inversion and consistent at-tention manipulation, and (b) token-wise cross-branch attention control ,which separates edit-relevant and structure-preserving components and modulates them asymmetrically during attention manipulation. Exten-sive experiments on PIE-Bench demonstrate that SimEdit consistently improves both inversion reconstruction quality and editing performance over previous attention-manipulation approaches. Our code is available at https://github.com/zju-pi/SimEdit .

## 1 Introduction 

Text-guided image editing [8, 11] modifies a given source image based on tex-tual instructions, aiming for precise semantic changes while preserving editing-irrelevant content. The source image can be real or synthesized, making this task widely applicable. Most state-of-the-art image editing methods are built upon diffusion models due to their excellent controllability and sampling diver-sity [1, 7, 22, 32]. However, retraining or fine-tuning diffusion models for task-specific editing remains computationally expensive.  

> †

Corresponding author 

> arXiv:2606.14125v1 [cs.CV] 12 Jun 2026

2 Z. Zhan et al. tree          

> [with
> [cat] ->[dog]
> flower]
> cartoon cat
> with [a pie]
> mouse
> [open]
> [wooden]
> bird on
> a tree
> [cartoon]
> woman
> woman in
> [field] ->
> [forest]
> Source P2P PnP RF-Inversion RF-Edit FireFlow UniEdit Ours

Fig. 1. We compare our proposed SimEdit with previous attention manipulation-based editing methods [6, 8, 9, 23, 28, 29] across seven scenarios. Overall, our method achieves better performance in both background preservation and semantic fidelity. 

Training-free approaches based on inversion and attention manipulation [3, 8, 14, 20, 28] provide a flexible alternative, yet they face two fundamental chal-lenges: (1) inversion errors accumulate [10,17,31], degrading reconstruction accu-racy and attention fidelity; and (2) cross-branch attention features often diverge significantly in semantics or spatial layout, leading to poor background preser-vation and structural distortions [8, 29]. To address these challenges, existing methods mainly focus on improving inversion solvers or attention manipulation mechanisms, while largely overlooking the role of textual conditioning during the editing process. In fact, we observe that textual conditioning shapes the diffusion velocity field and attention behavior, thereby affecting both inversion trajecto-ries and downstream attention manipulation. In this work, we systematically analyze how conditioning precision affects the stability of diffusion dynamics. We demonstrate both empirically and theoretically that coarse textual condi-tioning leads to an unstable diffusion velocity field with higher variance and larger effective Lipschitz constants, resulting in larger trajectory deviations and reconstruction errors. In contrast, more precise and semantically grounded con-Conditioning Matters for Diffusion Image Editing 3

ditioning stabilizes the velocity geometry. We further observe that conditioning precision and structural alignment also improve the consistency of cross-branch attention features during editing, which enhances the effectiveness of attention manipulation. Building on these observations, we propose SimEdit, a simple structured conditioning framework for inversion-based diffusion editing. Guided by the analysis on the correlation between textual conditioning and diffusion veloc-ity field, we first refine conditioning signals to improve inversion stability and cross-branch structural consistency. However, refined conditioning also increases token density, which makes attention manipulation more delicate: editing re-quires simultaneously preserving structure-preserving content and enforcing edit-driving semantics, two fundamentally different roles that cannot be handled uni-formly. We therefore decompose conditioning components into edit-relevant and edit-irrelevant groups, and modulate them differently in attention via token-wise cross-branch attention control to balance structural appearance preser-vation with precise semantic transfer. Through this conditioning-aware per-spective, SimEdit achieves consistent improvements in both inversion accuracy and editing fidelity on PIE-Bench as demonstrated in Fig.1. Moreover, our ap-proach is training-free and can be seamlessly integrated into existing inversion-based pipelines, offering a practical yet theoretically grounded enhancement for diffusion-based image editing. Our main contributions are summarized as follows: 

– We present a geometric perspective on textual conditioning in inversion pro-cess, empirically and theoretically demonstrating that conditioning precision directly influences the smoothness of the diffusion velocity field and the sta-bility of inversion trajectories. 

– Based on this insight, we propose SimEdit, a conditioning-aware framework that refines conditioning signals and introduces an asymmetric attention modulation strategy for structure-preserving and edit-driving conditioning components to handle them differently, thereby balancing structural preser-vation and semantic editing. 

– Extensive experiments on PIE-Bench demonstrate that SimEdit consistently improves inversion reconstruction quality and editing fidelity across multi-ple attention manipulation pipelines, while remaining fully training-free and compatible with existing methods. 

## 2 Related works 

Text-to-image diffusion models rely on textual conditioning to guide genera-tive dynamics through cross-attention or transformer-based conditioning mech-anisms [1, 7, 21, 22]. Recent DiT-based architectures achieve stronger synthesis quality and semantic coherence via deeper transformer backbones and more ex-pressive conditioning pathways [7]. While prior studies analyze how attention maps correlate with semantic regions [26] or how conditioning affects controlla-bility [5], the geometric influence of textual conditioning on diffusion dynamics remains underexplored. In particular, little attention has been paid to how the 4 Z. Zhan et al. 

precision and structure of conditioning influence diffusion dynamics, inversion stability and downstream editing behavior. Diffusion-based inversion enables training-free image editing by projecting a source image into latent space and regenerating it under modified conditions [16, 25]. However, inversion fidelity critically depends on the stability of diffusion trajectories. Accumulated discretization errors and integration mismatch often lead to divergence between inversion and reconstruction paths [10, 17, 18, 30]. To mitigate these issues, previous works explore improved solvers [2, 14, 29], trajectory alignment strategies [10, 17], and stochastic inversion techniques [18, 30]. These approaches primarily focus on improving the inversion process itself, while largely treating the conditioning signal as fixed. Attention manipulation further enhances editing controllability by injecting or reweighting features between source and target branches. Prompt-to-Prompt (P2P) [8] transfers cross-attention maps to preserve spatial structure, while sub-sequent methods extend this idea using self-attention maps [28], value matri-ces [3], segmentation masks [14, 20], or stronger base models [23, 29]. Although these methods improve background preservation and semantic control, they rely on stable inversion trajectories and consistent cross-branch attention features to function effectively. In contrast to prior works that refine inversion solvers or modulate attention features, we investigate the geometric role of textual conditioning in stabilizing diffusion dynamics and demonstrate that conditioning-aware representations of textual conditioning signals can substantially improve both inversion stability and attention consistency without modifying the underlying diffusion model. 

## 3 Background 

Flow Matching . Recent state-of-the-art text-to-image synthesis and editing methods [1, 7, 27, 29] increasingly adopt flow matching to model the generative process. In this formulation, flow matching learns a continuous mapping from a data distribution x0 ∼ p0 to a prior x1 ∼ p1 [13]. A linear interpolation xτ =(1 −τ )x0+τ x1, with τ ∈ [0 , 1] , defines the forward trajectory, and the correspond-ing velocity field satisfies dxτ 

> dτ

= vθ (xτ , τ | P ). The velocity field vθ (xτ , τ | P )

defines the time derivative of the sampling trajectory conditioned on textual signal P , which governs how the latent xτ evolves at timestep τ . Flow matching trains a time-dependent conditioned velocity field vθ (xτ , τ | P ) via the objective: 

Lθ = Eτ, x0, x1, P 

∥(x1 − x0) − vθ (xτ , τ | P )∥2 . The prior p1 is typically set to the standard Gaussian N (0, I), aligning with diffusion models [13] 1. In practice, the continuous trajectory is discretized into a predefined schedule {σT , . . . , σ 0},yielding the sampling update: xσt = xσt+1 + ( σt − σt+1 ) · vθ (xσt+1 , σ t+1 | P ). Im-portantly, the conditioning signal P modulates the learned velocity field and thus shapes the geometry and stability of diffusion trajectories. The inversion trajec-tory xinv  

> σt

in the flow matching framework first projects the clean source image   

> 1In this paper, we interchangeably use (Gaussian) flow-based and diffusion-based generative models due to their equivalence. Conditioning Matters for Diffusion Image Editing 5

to a noise latent conditioned on the source prompt Psrc , and then a reconstruc-tion process is performed conditioned on the same prompt to collect attention features for injection. However, due to accumulated discretization errors, the re-construction trajectory gradually deviates from the inversion trajectory, leading to inferior recovery of the source image in attention manipulation-based editing. 

Inversion-based editing . Recent T2I models [1, 7] integrate text–image interactions and intra-image dependencies within unified attention blocks that process both textual and visual tokens. Starting from the inverted latent noise 

xinv  

> σT

, we can perform sampling conditioned on the target prompt Ptar to generate an image that loosely preserves the structure of the source image. However, this direct approach often fails to maintain fine-grained details of Isrc due to the lim-ited control during the sampling process. To address this, attention manipulation in inversion-based editing methods operates on two parallel sampling trajectories starting from the same inverted latent: the source (reconstruction) branch 

conditioned on Psrc that reconstructs the original image, and the target (edit-ing) branch conditioned on Ptar that generates the edited result. These methods inject attention features—such as queries, keys, and values—extracted from the source branch into the target branch [3,8,28]. Specifically, these methods linearly interpolate attention features at selected layers and timesteps, with interpolation weights controlling the contribution from each branch. The resulting mixed at-tention is then used during the target branch’s sampling, guiding generation with structural cues from the source image while adhering to the semantics of the tar-get prompt. In our framework, we study multiple attention feature replacement strategies. Empirical comparisons show that our conditioning-aware structuring consistently improves inversion stability and editing performance across different replacement schemes. 

## 4 Motivation 

In practice, inversion-based image editing is a condition-driven process consisting of two coupled stages: inversion and cross-branch attention manipulation .In the inversion stage, the source image is mapped into the latent space by integrating a condition-dependent velocity field. The properties of the textual conditioning influence the stability of this velocity field, and a more stable veloc-ity field leads to a more consistent inversion trajectory, which in turn determines how accurately the structural and semantic information can be reconstructed. In the subsequent attention manipulation stage, features extracted from the recon-struction branch are injected into a target-conditioned branch initialized from the same latent state obtained from inversion. The effectiveness of this cross-branch attention manipulation is influenced by the form of the textual conditioning sig-nals, which affects how preserved structures and newly introduced semantics are combined during editing. From this perspective, textual conditioning is not merely a descriptive input, but an important factor that shapes both the velocity field during inversion and the feature coupling during attention manipulation. In the following, we analyze 6 Z. Zhan et al.  

> Fig. 2. Illustration of inversion and reconstruction under (a) stable and (b) chaotic velocity fields. A more stable velocity field leads the forward and backward integration trajectories to exhibit closer alignment, resulting in smaller reconstruction errors.

how its precision and structure modulate (i) the stability of the inversion process and (ii) the effectiveness of cross-branch attention manipulation, providing a unified perspective on the role of textual conditioning in inversion-based editing. 

4.1 Inversion Stability 

In inversion-based diffusion editing, the source image is mapped into the latent space by integrating the sampling ODE in the reverse direction with a discretized solver. Inversion errors arise from forward–backward discretization discrepancies, which are amplified by local fluctuations in the velocity field. As illustrated in Fig. 2, a stable velocity field is therefore crucial for accurate inversion. Prior analyses (e.g., [4, 24]) suggest that the learned velocity field vθ approximates a local average direction toward the data manifold. Building on this geometric in-terpretation, we hypothesize that the precision of textual conditioning implicitly constrains the effective support of the conditional data manifold: imprecise con-ditioning leads to dispersed and less coherent velocity directions, whereas more precise and semantically grounded conditioning stabilizes the velocity field. To empirically examine this hypothesis, we construct conditioning signals with progressively richer semantic descriptions by expanding the original prompts with additional image-grounded details, resulting in three levels of conditioning: 

coarse , detailed , and complex . At each timestep, we perturb the latent state 

xσt with small Gaussian noise and measure the directional stability of the veloc-ity field. Specifically, given the reference velocity vσt = vθ (xσt , σ t, c ) along the inversion trajectory, we generate N perturbed samples x(i) 

> σt

= xσt + δ(i), where 

δ(i) ∼ N (0 , ϵ 2I) and i = 1 , . . . , N , and compute the corresponding velocities Conditioning Matters for Diffusion Image Editing 7

Fig. 3. Textual conditioning stabilizes inversion dynamics and cross-branch attention coupling. (a) More precise textual conditioning better matches the source image, as indicated by higher BLIP similarity, and reduces directional deviation ∆, reconstruction MSE, and empirical Lipschitz constant L. (b) Increasing conditioning precision reduces cross-branch attention divergence, measured by Attn-L2, and improves background preservation metrics (LPIPS, PSNR, MSE). (c) Better source-target alignment shows the same trend, yielding more consistent attention coupling and faithful background preservation. 

v(i) 

> σt

. The cosine directional deviation is then defined as: 

∆ = 1

T

1

N

> T

X

> t=1
> N

X

> i=1



1 − cos 



v(i) 

> σt

, vσt

 

,

where cos( a, b) = a⊤b 

> ∥a∥ ∥ b∥

denotes the cosine similarity between two vectors. This deviation measures the sensitivity of the velocity direction under local per-turbations (see Appendix B for details). A smaller ∆ indicates smoother and more stable dynamics. We compute the average ∆ over an evaluation subset of PIE-Bench [10]. As shown in Fig. 3(a), conditioning signals with higher se-mantic precision consistently yield smaller directional deviation ∆ and lower MSE reconstruction loss, which leads to more satisfied reconstruction results in Fig. 4(a). Besides the empirical analysis of directional stability, we further provide a theoretical justification for the observed relationship between conditioning pre-cision and inversion stability. Let v(x, t ; P ) denote the velocity field conditioned on the textual signal P . We consider the pure inversion–reconstruction setting, where x0 is the input source image to be inverted, and xrec (0; P ) is the image recovered by inverting x0 to the noise latent and integrating back to t = 0 un-der the same conditioning P . Under mild smoothness assumptions, with both trajectories computed using the first-order explicit Euler solver with maximum step size h, the inversion–reconstruction error satisfies: 

∥xrec (0; P ) − x0∥ ≤ 2 CL

 eLT − 1 h, 

where L = sup t ∥Jv (x, t )∥2 is the Lipschitz constant of the velocity field and 

C = 12 sup t ∥Jv v + ∂tv∥ characterizes trajectory curvature (see Appendix A for 8 Z. Zhan et al.  

> Fig. 4. (a): Visualization of inversion reconstruction under different conditioning preci-sion. (b): Editing results at varying prompt conditioning precision. As the conditioning precision increases, both the reconstruction accuracy and the preservation of back-ground structure improve notably.

derivation). For first-order flow-based sampling with maximum step size h, a smaller Lipschitz constant L leads to a tighter reconstruction bound. We estimate the empirical Lipschitz constant via stochastic power iteration. As illustrated in Fig. 3(a), conditioning signals with higher semantic precision consistently yield smaller estimated L, thereby tightening the theoretical error bound and improving inversion stability. 

4.2 Effectiveness of Cross-Branch Attention Manipulation 

In the attention manipulation stage, we examine how textual conditioning influ-ences cross-branch attention coupling during editing. Starting from the shared latent obtained from inversion, attention manipulation injects features from the source branch into the target branch. The construction of the conditioning sig-nals influences how preserved structures and newly introduced semantics are integrated during this attention manipulation. 

Conditioning precision and background preservation. Attention ma-nipulation integrates structural information from the source branch with edit semantics from the target branch during generation. The precision of textual conditioning plays a critical role in this process: imprecise conditioning provides weak semantic guidance, which can lead to asymmetric attention features be-tween the two branches and consequently inaccurate reconstruction of source image details. Following the experimental setting in Sec. 4.1, we analyze how conditioning precision affects cross-branch attention consistency and background preservation during editing. To quantify cross-branch attention divergence, we Conditioning Matters for Diffusion Image Editing 9 

> Fig. 5. In certain cases, however, finer-grained textual conditioning may dilute the semantics of the core editing content—e.g., the sushi example shows that detailed and complex conditioning fail to clearly represent the intended sushi concept. Our proposed token-wise cross-branch attention control successfully restores the semantic fidelity of the edited content.

use Attn-L2, defined as the averaged L2 distance between corresponding source-and target-branch cross-attention maps, with the full computation provided in Appendix C. As shown in Fig. 3(b), more precise textual conditioning reduces this attention divergence, thereby facilitating attention fusion and improving background preservation, as demonstrated in Fig. 4(b). 

Conditioning alignment. In addition to the precision, the structural align-ment of textual conditioning between the source and target branches also in-fluences cross-branch attention coupling. When the conditioning structures are misaligned—even if they describe semantically equivalent content—the corre-sponding attention features can become asymmetric during editing, leading to feature interference and degraded background preservation. To examine this ef-fect, we construct prompt pairs with identical semantics but different levels of structural alignment. Starting from aligned source–target conditioning, we intro-duce weak and strong perturbations that progressively disrupt their alignment without changing their semantics. As shown in Fig. 3(c), better-aligned condi-tioning leads to lower cross-branch divergence between corresponding attention elements, resulting in improved background preservation during editing. 

## 5 Method 

Building upon the conditioning analysis in Sec. 4, we propose a conditioning-aware inversion-based editing framework shown that improves both inversion stability and cross-branch attention consistency. The framework contains two components: (1) conditioning refinement , which increases conditioning precision while preserving structural alignment between source and target prompts; and (2) token-wise cross-branch attention control , which separates edit-relevant and structure-preserving tokens and applies asymmetric attention modulation during attention manipulation. Refined conditioning improves inversion stability and background preserva-tion by providing more precise and aligned textual guidance. However, it also 10 Z. Zhan et al.     

> Fig. 6. In our token-wise attention control, shared tokens are matched using the LCS algorithm. Subsequently, attention features for editing-driving and structure-preserving tokens are processed separately through reinforcement and replacement , respectively.

increases token complexity in the prompt. Since attention weights are normal-ized across tokens, complex conditioning may dilute the contribution of edit-driving tokens, weakening the semantic strength of the intended edit. To ad-dress this issue, we introduce token-wise cross-branch attention control, which first separates edit-driving and structure-preserving tokens using a dynamic programming-based alignment algorithm, and then modulates their attention contributions asymmetrically during attention manipulation. 

5.1 Conditioning Refinement (CR) 

As shown in Sec.4, conditioning precision and structural alignment influence inversion stability and cross-branch attention coupling. To improve both prop-erties, we refine the conditioning signals by expanding prompts with additional contextual attributes, structured descriptions and background information while preserving the shared semantic structure between the source and target prompts. In practice, conditioning refinement can be instantiated using external language models to generate more descriptive prompts. However, our framework is not tied to any specific refinement model, and alternative strategies that improve conditioning precision while maintaining source–target alignment can also be adopted. 

5.2 Token-wise Cross-Branch Attention Control (TCAC) 

While refined conditioning improves structural consistency, it also increases to-ken complexity and may dilute edit semantics under attention normalization (as shown in Fig. 5). To mitigate this effect, we partition conditioning tokens into two groups using the Longest Common Subsequence (LCS) algorithm in Alg. 1 between the tokenized sequences of refined source and target prompts: Conditioning Matters for Diffusion Image Editing 11 

Algorithm 1 Token Alignment via LCS                                                            

> Input : Target ˆPtgt , Source ˆPsrc , Tokenizer T
> Output : Structure-preserving token indices kand edit-driving token indices k
> 1: target_id ← T .encode ( ˆPtgt )
> 2: src_id ← T .encode ( ˆPsrc )
> 3: n← | target_id |,m← | src_id |
> 4: Initialize dp as zero matrix of size (n+1) ×(m+1)
> 5: for i= 0 to n−1do
> 6: for j= 0 to m−1do
> 7: if target_id [i] = src_id [j]then
> 8: dp [i+1][ j+1] ←dp [i][ j] + 1
> 9: else
> 10: dp [i+1][ j+1] ←max( dp [i][ j+1] , dp [i+1][ j])
> 11: end if
> 12: end for
> 13: end for
> 14: Backtrack from dp [n][ m]to obtain (Ktgt ,Ksrc )
> 15: k← K tgt {structure-preserving tokens} 16: k← { 0, . . . , n −1} \ K tgt {edit-driving tokens} 17: return k, k

structure-preserving tokens k shared across the two prompts, and edit-driving tokens k that appear only in the target prompt. Given this token partition, we apply asymmetric cross-branch attention control as demonstrated in Fig. 6. Dur-ing the cross-branch editing process, structure-preserving tokens follow standard feature injection from the source branch into the target branch to preserve back-ground consistency, while edit-driving tokens k are reinforced by a amplification factor λ during attention computation to compensate for normalization-induced dilution: 

A[: , k i] ← λA [: , k i].

This asymmetric modulation preserves background structures while maintaining strong editing semantics under dense conditioning. 

## 6 Experiments 

6.1 Setup 

Baselines and Implementations. We compare SimEdit with a wide range of at-tention manipulation-based editing methods across two major categories: (1) early methods [3, 8, 12, 28] built on U-Net-based T2I models [22], and (2) recent methods [6, 23, 29] built on DiT-based T2I models [1, 7]. All baselines use offi-cial implementations and default settings. To directly demonstrate the effect of our method, we conduct primary evaluations without external masks. In prac-tice, our conditioning-control framework is orthogonal to mask supervision and 12 Z. Zhan et al. 

Method PSNR ↑ LPIPS ↓ MSE ↓ SSIM ↑

Euler 20.94 167.49 151.25 81.02 Euler + CR 22.19 (+5.98%) 139.5 (-16.71%) 112.46 (-25.61%) 83.18 (+2.67%) 

RF-Solver 22.77 146.82 119.86 79.79 RF-Solver + CR 24.52 (+7.68%) 109.11 (-25.69%) 67.87 (-43.37%) 83.8 (+5.04%) 

FireFlow 16.62 268.8 354.74 65.88 FireFlow + CR 18.16 (+9.25%) 220.76 (-17.88%) 231.9 (-34.61%) 70.46 (+6.94%) 

FP Inversion 20.81 147.11 177.25 79.98 FP Inversion + CR 22.96 (+10.33%) 96.9 (-34.14%) 124.04 (-29.98%) 84.47 (+5.62%) 

Table 1. Quantitative comparison for the effectiveness of conditioning refinement (CR ) in inversion and reconstruction. 

Fig. 7. Inversion and reconstruction results using different solvers, including Euler, RF-Solver [29], FireFlow [6], and FP Inversion [15]. For each method, reconstruction is performed with the coarse conditioning (left) and the refined conditioning (right). 

Method Mask Model Structure Background Preservation CLIP Similarity CLIPSim* 

Distance ↓ PSNR ↑ LPIPS ↓ MSE ↓ SSIM ↑ Whole ↑ Edited ↑ Whole ↑ Edited ↑

Uni-edit (ICLR’26) [9] Y FLUX 10.35 28.97 63.35 20.98 90.67 25.71 22.24 27.35 22.71 Uni-edit+ CR Y FLUX 8.83 30.17 53.29 16.76 91.66 25.65 22.18 27.76 22.90 KV-edit (CVPR’25) [33] Y FLUX 1.70 34.85 12.4 5.42 95.70 24.28 20.14 26.30 20.42 KV-edit+ CR Y FLUX 1.72 34.82 12.5 5.43 95.71 24.75 20.62 26.98 21.22 P2P [8] N SD1.4 71.34 17.85 209.1 220.8 71.44 25.13 22.47 25.07 22.14 PnP [28] N SD1.4 27.43 22.26 113.58 84.13 79.24 25.45 22.54 25.65 22.79 MasaCtrl [3] N SD1.4 28.38 22.17 106.62 86.97 79.67 23.96 22.16 25.75 21.85 P2P-Zero [19] N SD1.4 61.68 20.44 172.22 144.12 74.67 22.8 20.54 - -Rf-Inversion (IClR’25) [23] N FLUX 20.84 22.56 171.5 85.77 74.98 25.3 22.14 26.64 22.54 Rf-Edit (ICML’25) [29] N FLUX 18.59 23.39 137.2 70.09 81.26 25.97 22.8 27.09 23.27 FireFlow (ICML’25) [6] N FLUX 28.3 23.08 128.79 71.07 81.15 26.16 22.85 27.47 23.42 

SimEdit N FLUX 23.20 24.03 98.60 59.61 85.75 26.18 23.07 28.38 23.90 

Table 2. Quantitative comparison on PIE-Bench. Conditioning Matters for Diffusion Image Editing 13                                                    

> Method Model Structure Background Preservation CLIP Similarity CLIP Similarity*
> Distance ↓PSNR ↑LPIPS ↓MSE ↓SSIM ↑Whole ↑Edited ↑Whole ↑Edited ↑
> Base FLUX 24.13 23.99 108.79 62.48 85.01 25.91 22.78 27.18 23.16 +CR FLUX 23.28 24.09 97.57 60.15 85.61 25.92 22.83 28.24 23.78 +CR +TCAC FLUX 23.20 24.03 98.60 59.61 85.75 26.18 23.07 28.38 23.90

Table 3. Ablation study on PIE-Bench. 

can be readily integrated into existing mask-guided editing pipelines [9, 33], fur-ther improving their performance (Tab. 2). Unless otherwise specified, we adopt FLUX.1-dev as the base model with its standard 25 sampling steps for both in-version and editing. In attention manipulation-based editing, the manipulation interval has a strong influence on the editing outcome. Longer manipulation in-tervals inject more structural information from the source branch, improving background preservation but weakening semantic fidelity. To balance structural preservation and semantic modification, we apply cross-branch attention ma-nipulation within the timestep interval [0 , 4] . For conditioning refinement, we use Gemini-2.5-Pro to expand the original prompts with additional image-grounded descriptions. More details are provided in Appendix D. 

Evaluation Datasets and Metrics. Following our baselines, we evaluate on PIE-Bench [10], which contains 700 editing examples across 10 categories. Each ex-ample contains source/target prompts, an editing instruction, and a binary mask specifying the edited region, allowing separate evaluation of edited and preserved areas. Following prior work, we measure performance from three perspectives: (1) structural consistency (DINO feature distance), (2) background preservation (PSNR, SSIM, LPIPS, MSE outside edited region), and (3) semantic alignment (CLIP similarity).Since conditioning signals in PIE-Bench are often minimal and foreground-focused, raw CLIP similarity may under-reflect global semantic co-herence. To obtain a more comprehensive assessment of conditioning alignment, we additionally report CLIPSim*, computed using descriptive reference condi-tioning that captures the full semantic content of the edited image. The reference conditioning used for evaluation is included in the released code. 

6.2 Comparisons 

Inversion and Reconstruction. To verify the geometric analysis in Sec. 4, we eval-uate inversion and reconstruction under refined conditioning signals across mul-tiple inversion solvers performed on the same base model [1]. As shown in Tab. 1, conditioning refinement consistently reduces reconstruction errors (PSNR, SSIM, MSE, LPIPS) across different solvers. This supports our theoretical claim that conditioning precision stabilizes the velocity field, effectively reducing the accu-mulation of inversion errors. Qualitative results in Fig. 7 further illustrate that coarse conditioning leads to trajectory deviation and reconstruction artifacts, while refined conditioning yields smoother dynamics and improved reconstruc-tion fidelity. 14 Z. Zhan et al. 

Image Editing. We evaluate editing performance under mask-free settings to directly demonstrate the effect of our methods. As shown in Tab. 2, our frame-work achieves superior performance across both structural preservation and se-mantic alignment metrics compared to existing attention manipulation base-lines in a mask-free setting. Moreover, when integrated into mask-guided edit-ing pipelines, our conditioning refinement schema further improves editing per-formance, demonstrating its compatibility and complementarity with external structural supervision. Notably, background preservation metrics and semantic similarity inherently form a trade-off. Methods favoring reconstruction tend to under-edit, while aggressive semantic conditioning often sacrifices structure. Our approach achieves a balanced regime by combining conditioning refinement with token-wise cross-Branch attention control. Qualitative comparisons in Fig. 1 fur-ther demonstrate improved structural coherence and semantic precision. 

6.3 Ablation Study 

We analyze the contribution of each component in our SimEdit editing frame-work. Starting from a base attention manipulation-based editing setup, we pro-gressively introduce (i) Conditioning Refinement( CR ) and (ii) Token-wise Cross-branch Attention Control( TCAC ). As shown in Tab. 3, conditioning refinement brings substantial improvements in background preservation (e.g., LPIPS re-duces by 10%), consistent with its role in stabilizing inversion geometry and enabling more accurate recovery of source image details. The subsequent intro-duction of token-wise cross-branch attention control tackles the normalization-induced dilution caused by conditioning refinement. As illustrated in Fig. 5, refined textual conditioning with dense tokens can dilute core editing semantics (e.g., the sushi example), and TCAC successfully recovers the semantic strength of edit-driving tokens, leading to improved CLIP similarity while maintaining the background preservation quality. More qualitative results are provided in the Appendix D. 

6.4 Additional Analysis                                                          

> Method Structure Background Preservation CLIP Similarity CLIP Similarity*
> Distance ↓PSNR ↑LPIPS ↓MSE ↓SSIM ↑Whole ↑Edited ↑Whole ↑Edited ↑
> P2P 38.36 20.89 138.71 129.94 81.02 26.49 23.20 27.15 23.21 P2P+CR 38.07 21.32 127.23 116.18 82.26 26.36 23.12 28.48 23.79 Masa 23.32 24.18 106.87 60.23 85.29 25.83 22.71 27.11 23.13 Masa+CR 22.93 24.17 97.71 58.98 85.67 25.87 22.79 28.19 23.76
> Table 4. Impact of our conditioning refinement on different editing pipeline.

Impact of Conditioning Refinement To demonstrate the general applicabil-ity of conditioning refinement across different attention manipulation strategies, Conditioning Matters for Diffusion Image Editing 15 

we analyze its effect on several representative inversion-based editing pipelines. We apply the same conditioning refinement strategy to several representative inversion-based editing frameworks. For a fair comparison under the same back-bone, we re-implement the classical P2P (QK replacement) and MasaCtrl (KV replacement) attention manipulation strategies on the FLUX model. As shown in Tab. 4, conditioning refinement consistently improves editing performance across different pipelines. These results suggest that conditioning refinement acts as a general improvement to conditioning quality and can benefit multiple inversion-based editing frameworks.                                                

> Model Structure Background Preservation CLIP Similarity CLIP Similarity*
> Distance ↓PSNR ↑LPIPS ↓MSE ↓SSIM ↑Whole ↑Edited ↑Whole ↑Edited ↑
> No Refine 24.13 23.99 108.79 62.48 85.01 25.91 22.78 27.18 23.16 GPT5 23.94 23.95 103.54 60.77 85.13 26.17 23.10 28.23 23.91 Gemini2.5-Pro 23.28 24.09 97.57 60.15 85.61 25.92 22.83 28.24 23.78

Table 5. Effectiveness of conditioning refinement with GPT5 and Gemini2.5-Pro. 

Conditioning Refinements with Different Vision-Language Models To examine whether conditioning refinement depends on a specific vision-language model, we generate refined prompts using different VLMs for the PIE-Bench dataset and evaluate the resulting editing performance under our pipeline. As shown in Tab. 5, prompts refined by different VLMs consistently improve editing performance compared to the original prompts. Although the absolute perfor-mance varies slightly across models, the overall trend remains consistent across evaluation metrics. These results suggest that conditioning refinement is model-agnostic and can generally improve conditioning quality for inversion-based im-age editing. 

Latency Analysis. The average runtimes for the standard inversion and editing stages on PIE-Bench are 31.78 s and 7.34 s, respectively. Our proposed condition-ing refinement requires 11.97 s, resulting in a total runtime of 51.09 s per sample. This indicates that the conditioning refinement step accounts for only a small portion of the overall pipeline and is not the main latency bottleneck. 

## 7 Conclusion 

In this paper, we present SimEdit, a conditioning-aware framework for inversion-based diffusion image editing. By analyzing textual conditioning as a geometric constraint on the diffusion velocity field, we show that the formulation of tex-tual conditioning influences inversion stability and cross-branch attention con-sistency. Building upon this insight, our framework refines conditioning signals 16 Z. Zhan et al. 

to stabilize diffusion dynamics and introduces token-wise cross-branch atten-tion control to balance structural preservation and semantic modification. To-gether, these components enable improved inversion fidelity and editing accuracy without retraining the underlying generative model. Although SimEdit achieves strong and consistent performance, the timestep interval for attention manipu-lation still requires manual selection. This limitation is shared by most existing inversion-based editing methods that rely on attention manipulation. An impor-tant direction for future work is to develop adaptive scheduling strategies that automatically adjust the timestep interval for attention manipulation based on input-dependent conditioning characteristics. 

Supplementary Material. Additional details, complete proofs, and extended ex-perimental results are provided in the supplementary material available at https: //github.com/zju-pi/SimEdit .

Acknowledgments. This work is supported by the National Natural Science Foun-dation of China (No. 62476244), the Starry Night Science Fund of Zhejiang University Shanghai Institute for Advanced Study, China (Grant No. SN-ZJU-SIAS-001) and the advanced computing resources provided by the Supercomputing Center of Hangzhou City University. We also thank Jialing Cai for the help with figure preparation. 

## References 

1. Black-Forest: Flux (2024), https://github.com/black-forest-labs/flux 

2. Brack, M., Friedrich, F., Kornmeier, K., Tsaban, L., Schramowski, P., Kersting, K., Passos, A.: Limitless image editing using text-to-image models. In: CVPR (2024) 3. Cao, M., Wang, X., Qi, Z., Shan, Y., Qie, X., Zheng, Y.: Masactrl: Tuning-free mutual self-attention control for consistent image synthesis and editing. In: ICCV (2023) 4. Chen, D., Zhou, Z., Wang, C., Shen, C., Lyu, S.: On the trajectory regularity of ode-based diffusion sampling. In: ICML (2024) 5. Datta, S., Ku, A., Ramachandran, D., Anderson, P.: Prompt expansion for adaptive text-to-image generation. In: ACL (2024) 6. Deng, Y., He, X., Mei, C., Wang, P., Tang, F.: Fireflow: Fast inversion of rectified flow for image semantic editing. In: ICML (2025) 7. Esser, P., Kulal, S., Blattmann, A., Entezari, R., Müller, J., Saini, H., Levi, Y., Lorenz, D., Sauer, A., Boesel, F., et al.: Scaling rectified flow transformers for high-resolution image synthesis. In: ICML (2024) 8. Hertz, A., Mokady, R., Tenenbaum, J., Aberman, K., Pritch, Y., Cohen-Or, D.: Prompt-to-prompt image editing with cross-attention control. In: ICLR (2023) 9. Jiao, G., Huang, B., Wang, K.C., Liao, R.: Uniedit-flow: Unleashing inversion and editing in the era of flow models. arXiv:2504.13109 (2025) 10. Ju, X., Zeng, A., Bian, Y., Liu, S., Xu, Q.: Direct inversion: Boosting diffusion-based editing with 3 lines of code. arXiv:2310.01506 (2023) 11. Kawar, B., Zada, S., Lang, O., Tov, O., Chang, H., Dekel, T., Mosseri, I., Irani, M.: Imagic: Text-based real image editing with diffusion models. In: CVPR (2023) Conditioning Matters for Diffusion Image Editing 17 12. Li, Y., Shao, H.C., Liang, X., Chen, L., Li, R., Jiang, S., Wang, J., Zhang, Y.: Zero-shot medical image translation via frequency-guided diffusion models. IEEE Trans. Med. Imaging (2023) 13. Lipman, Y., Chen, R.T.Q., Ben-Hamu, H., Nickel, M., Le, M.: Flow matching for generative modeling. In: ICLR (2023) 14. Lu, S., Liu, Y., Kong, A.W.K.: Tf-icon: Diffusion-based training-free cross-domain image composition. In: ICCV (2023) 15. Meiri, B., Samuel, D., Darshan, N., Chechik, G., Avidan, S., Ben-Ari, R.: Fixed-point inversion for text-to-image diffusion models. arXiv:2312.12540 (2023) 16. Meng, C., He, Y., Song, Y., Song, J., Wu, J., Zhu, J., Ermon, S.: Sdedit: Guided image synthesis and editing with stochastic differential equations. In: ICLR (2022) 17. Mokady, R., Hertz, A., Aberman, K., Pritch, Y., Cohen-Or, D.: Null-text inversion for editing real images using guided diffusion models. In: CVPR (2023) 18. Nie, S., Guo, H.A., Lu, C., Zhou, Y., Zheng, C., Li, C.: The blessing of randomness: Sde beats ode in general diffusion-based image editing. In: ICLR (2023) 19. Parmar, G., Kumar Singh, K., Zhang, R., Li, Y., Lu, J., Zhu, J.Y.: Zero-shot image-to-image translation. In: ACM SIGGRAPH (2023) 20. Patashnik, O., Garibi, D., Azuri, I., Averbuch-Elor, H., Cohen-Or, D.: Localizing object-level shape variations with text-to-image diffusion models. In: ICCV (2023) 21. Peebles, W., Xie, S.: Scalable diffusion models with transformers. In: ICCV (2023) 22. Rombach, R., Blattmann, A., Lorenz, D., Esser, P., Ommer, B.: High-resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models. In: CVPR (2022) 23. Rout, L., Chen, Y., Ruiz, N., Caramanis, C., Shakkottai, S., Chu, W.S.: Semantic image inversion and editing using rectified stochastic differential equations. In: ICLR (2025) 24. Stanczuk, J.P., Batzolis, G., Deveney, T., Schönlieb, C.B.: Diffusion models encode the intrinsic dimension of data manifolds. In: Forty-first International Conference on Machine Learning (2024) 25. Su, X., Song, J., Meng, C., Ermon, S.: Dual diffusion implicit bridges for image-to-image translation. In: ICLR (2023) 26. Tang, R., Liu, L., Pandey, A., Jiang, Z., Yang, G., Kumar, K., Stenetorp, P., Lin, J., Türe, F.: What the daam: Interpreting stable diffusion using cross attention. In: ACL (2023) 27. Tewel, Y., Gal, R., Samuel, D., Atzmon, Y., Wolf, L., Chechik, G.: Training-free ob-ject insertion in images with pretrained diffusion models. arXiv:2411.07232 (2024) 28. Tumanyan, N., Geyer, M., Bagon, S., Dekel, T.: Plug-and-play diffusion features for text-driven image-to-image translation. In: CVPR (2023) 29. Wang, J., Pu, J., Qi, Z., Guo, J., Ma, Y., Huang, N., Chen, Y., Li, X., Shan, Y.: Taming rectified flow for inversion and editing. In: ICML (2025) 30. Wu, C.H., De la Torre, F.: A latent space of stochastic diffusion models for zero-shot image editing and guidance. In: ICCV (2023) 31. Xu, P., Jiang, B., Hu, X., Luo, D., He, Q., Zhang, J., Wang, C., Wu, Y., Ling, C., Wang, B.: Unveil inversion and invariance in flow transformer for versatile image editing. In: CVPR (2025) 32. Zhan, Z., Chen, D., Mei, J.P., Zhao, Z., Chen, J., Chen, C., Lyu, S., Wang, C.: Conditional image synthesis with diffusion models: A survey. TMLR (2025) 33. Zhu, T., Zhang, S., Shao, J., Tang, Y.: Kv-edit: Training-free image editing for precise background preservation. arXiv:2502.17363 (2025) 18 Z. Zhan et al. 

## Appendix 

A. Reconstruction Bound 

In this appendix, we provide the complete derivation of the inversion–reconstruction error bound stated in the main paper. We begin by introducing global smooth-ness assumptions on the learned velocity field and then derive the global error bound for Euler discretization of the corresponding ODE flow. We then describe our practical estimator for the local Lipschitz constant based on a memory-efficient stochastic power-iteration scheme using Jacobian–vector (JVP) and vec-tor–Jacobian (VJP) products. 

Preliminaries We consider the latent trajectory governed by the flow 

˙x(t) = v(x(t), t ; P ), t ∈ [0 , T ], (1) where v is the velocity field conditioned on the textual prompt P . Both inversion (integrating t : 0 → T ) and reconstruction ( T → 0) employ the same velocity field and the same discretization scheme. Although flow-based generative models typically employ non-uniform time schedules, each update can be viewed as a first-order Euler integration step with a locally defined step size h.

Assumption A.1 (Global mild smoothness). The velocity field v(x, t ; Psrc ) is con-tinuously differentiable in both x and t, and its Jacobian and total time derivative are uniformly bounded over a domain Ω ⊂ Rd that contains all trajectories of interest. That is, there exist constants L, C > 0 such that for all x ∈ Ω and 

t ∈ [0 , T ],

∥Jv (x, t )∥2 ≤ L, (2) 

∥Jv (x, t )v(x, t ) + ∂tv(x, t )∥ ≤ 2C. (3) Equivalently, 

L = sup  

> x∈Ω,t ∈[0 ,T ]

∥Jv (x, t )∥2,C = 12 sup  

> x∈Ω,t ∈[0 ,T ]

∥Jv (x, t )v(x, t ) + ∂tv(x, t )∥.

(4) Here, L is a global Lipschitz constant of the velocity field, while C controls the magnitude of the second-order term ddt v = Jv v + ∂tv, which determines the curvature of Euler trajectories. 

Inversion–Reconstruction Error Bound Under the smoothness assump-tions stated above, the classical global error of explicit Euler integration with step size h satisfies: 

∥xk − x(tk)∥ ≤ CL

 eLt k − 1h. (5) Conditioning Matters for Diffusion Image Editing 19 

Since both inversion ( 0 → T ) and reconstruction ( T → 0) integrate the same velocity field using Euler discretization, the total error can be bounded by the sum of the two Euler integration errors. 

Proposition 1 (Inversion–Reconstruction Error). Under the bounds in Eqs. (2) –(3) , the reconstruction obtained by integrating forward to T and back satisfies: 

∥xrec (0; P ) − x0∥ ≤ 2 CL

 eLT − 1 hmax . (6) Here, hmax = max k hk denotes the maximum step size along the discretized trajectory. For flow models with T = 1 , the exponential dependence on L dom-inates the bound; therefore smaller Lipschitz constants directly lead to tighter reconstruction guarantees. 

Estimating the Lipschitz Constant L Direct computation of 

L = sup x,t || Jv (x, t )|| 2

is infeasible because the Jacobian Jv ∈ Rd×d for diffusion models has dimension factor d in the tens of thousands. Forming or storing this matrix is impossible, and computing its spectral norm exactly would require a prohibitively expensive singular value decomposition. To obtain a tractable approximation, we estimate ∥Jv ∥2 using stochastic power iteration . The spectral norm satisfies 

∥Jv ∥2 = max  

> ∥u∥=1

∥Jv u∥,

and repeated application of J⊤ 

> v

Jv drives any vector toward the dominant sin-gular vector. Crucially, this requires only Jacobian–vector products (JVPs) and vector–Jacobian products (VJPs), both of which can be computed through au-tomatic differentiation without forming Jv explicitly. This yields an tractable and memory-efficient estimator as demonstrated in Alg. 2, which is applicable to high-dimensional velocity fields. 

Trajectory-level estimation. We estimate local Jacobian spectral norms along the inversion trajectory. For every stride steps, we run M iterations of power iteration and obtain a local singular value estimate ˆλk. To ensure robustness while avoiding pathological outliers caused by rare numerical spikes, we report the empirical Lipschitz constant as the 95 th percentile: 

Lemp = P95  {ˆλk}.

In all experiments, we use stride = 2 and M = 3 , which provides a practical balance between estimation accuracy and computational overhead. 20 Z. Zhan et al. 

Algorithm 2 Stochastic Spectral-Norm Estimation of ∥Jv ∥2 via JVP/VJP 

Require: Inversion trajectory {(xk , t k )}, stride s, iterations M

1: K ← { k | k ≡ 0 (mod s) }

2: for each k ∈ K do 

3: Initialize u0 ∼ N (0 , I ) and normalize 4: for m = 0 to M − 1 do 

5: vm ← Jv (xk , t k ) um (JVP) 

6: wm ← Jv (xk , t k )⊤vm (VJP) 

7: um+1 ← wm/∥wm∥

8: end for 

9: ˆλk ← ∥ Jv (xk , t k ) uM ∥

10: end for 

11: return Lemp = P95 



{ˆλk : k ∈ K} 



## B. Inversion Stability 

This experiment examines how conditioning precision affects inversion stability. In this subsection, we describe the experimental procedure used to compute the directional deviation ∆, which measures the sensitivity of the velocity field to local perturbations along the inversion trajectory. To empirically examine this effect, we construct conditioning signals with progressively richer semantic descriptions by expanding the original prompts with additional image-grounded details. This procedure produces three levels of textual conditioning signals: P1 (coarse), P2 (detailed), and P3 (comprehensive). For each conditioning signal P , we perform the following steps: 1. Inversion Trajectory Construction: Given the prompt P and its cor-responding source image x0, we run the forward process in flow matching conditioned on P to obtain the inversion trajectory {xinv  

> σt

}Tt=0 with the ve-locity field {vσt (xinv  

> σt

, σ t, P )}Tt=0 along this trajectory. 2. Perturbation: At each timestep t, we generate N perturbed samples {x(i) 

> σt

}Ni=1 

by adding Gaussian noise: 

x(i) 

> σt

= xinv  

> σt

+ δ(i), δ(i) ∼ N (0 , ϵ 2I)

In this experiment, we set ϵ = 0 .005 . Similar conclusions can also be drawn under different ϵ settings. 3. Velocity Prediction: For each perturbed latent x(i) 

> σt

, we compute its ve-locity v conditioned on the signal P :

v(i) 

> σt

= vθ (x(i) 

> σt

, σ t, P )

4. Angular Deviation Calculation: To assess the stability of the velocity field, we measure the mean angular deviation ∆ between the velocities v(i)

> σt

on perturbed latents x(i) 

> σt

and the reference velocity vσt along the inversion Conditioning Matters for Diffusion Image Editing 21  

> Fig. 8. This figure presents the cross-attention maps of core content—specifically, the words "cat", "horse", and "bear" shown in the three respective rows—in the source branch and the target branch performed on different settings of conditioning signals, along with the corresponding editing results. The figure demonstrates that more precise and aligned textual conditioning lead to more consistent cross-attention maps and more accurate editing outcomes.

trajectory: 

∆ = 1

T

1

N

> T

X

> t=1
> N

X

> i=1



1 − cos 



v(i) 

> σt

, vσt

 

,

A smaller ∆ indicates lower velocity deviation under perturbations and thus reflects a more stable and consistent velocity field. 5. Statistical Comparison: For computational efficiency, we conduct this analysis on an official evaluation subset of PIE-Bench . For each image, we compute ∆ and report the dataset-level average ∆.

## C. Effectiveness of Cross-Branch Attention Manipulation 

In this experiment, we study how conditioning precision and alignment affect the distance between attention maps of the source and target branches during attention manipulation. For each editing instruction, we construct conditioning signals with different levels of structural alignment between the source and target branches. Starting from aligned source–target conditioning pairs, we introduce controlled perturbations to the conditioning structure while preserving the un-derlying semantic content. This allows us to analyze how conditioning alignment affects attention behavior during editing. To isolate effects purely attributable to attention behavior—rather than in-version—we directly sample the latent xT from a Gaussian distribution as the initialization for source/target branches, instead of performing inversion process. 22 Z. Zhan et al. 

Attention distance. To measure the consistency between attention features in the source and target branches, we compute the distance between their corre-sponding attention maps. Here, we provide a detailed explanation of how we compute the distance between attention maps. In the FLUX model, the attention map is computed as 

A = softmax( QK ⊤/√d),

where the query and key matrices are constructed by concatenating prompt and image features, 

Q = Qp, Q img 

 , K = Kp, K img 

 .

This yields a block-structured attention map: 

A =

 QpK⊤ 

> p

QpK⊤

> img

Qimg K⊤ 

> p

Qimg K⊤

> img



,

where the top-left and bottom-right blocks correspond to self-attention among text tokens and image patches, respectively, and the off-diagonal blocks encode cross-attention between them. We focus on the top-right cross-attention block 

Across = QpK⊤

> img

,

which captures how each text token attends to image patches. In our experiment, we quantify attention consistency at the cross-attention block. Concretely, we adopt the following analysis pipeline to measure cross-attention consistency be-tween the source and target branches: 1. Cross-attention map extraction: For each layer l, timestep t, and at-tention head h, we extract the full cross-attention block Across  

> l,t,h

for both the source and target branches. 2. Aggregation across layers, timesteps, and heads: We average the ex-tracted cross-attention maps over all layers, timesteps, and heads to obtain aggregated cross-attention maps 

Across src and Across tgt 

for the source and target branches, respectively. 3. Attention dissimilarity metric: We compute the (optionally normalized) 

ℓ2 distance between the aggregated source and target cross-attention maps: 

Dattn = Across src − Across tgt 2 ,

where the maps are flattened into vectors before computing the norm. 4. Statistical comparison: We evaluate Dattn for each example in the dataset and report the average within each experimental group (e.g., different con-ditioning precision or syntactic variants) for comparison. In practice, higher attention consistency facilitates more stable and semanti-cally coherent injection of attention features during editing, leading to improved editing results as shown in Fig. 8. These observations suggest that more precise and better-aligned conditioning signals help improve the effectiveness of atten-tion manipulation in diffusion-based image editing. Conditioning Matters for Diffusion Image Editing 23 

## D. Implementation Details 

Our implementation is based on FLUX.1-dev, with both inversion and editing performed using the default 25 sampling steps. For evaluation on PIE-Bench, at-tention manipulation is applied at timesteps [0 , 4] to balance background preser-vation and editing fidelity. To ensure reproducibility, we fix the random seed to 2

for all experiments involving stochasticity. All experiments are conducted on two NVIDIA A800 GPUs under CUDA 12.0. The base FLUX.1-dev model requires about 48 GB of GPU memory for processing 512 × 512 images in PIE-Bench. We use Ubuntu 18.04.5 as the operating system, with relevant software libraries Python 3.10, PyTorch 2.5.1+cu121 and diffusers 0.31.0. 

Conditioning Refinement 

In our implementation, refined conditioning signals are generated using a vision-language model based on the original source–target prompt pairs provided in PIE-Bench. Given the source image and the original prompts, the model pro-duces more detailed textual descriptions of the source image and refined target prompts that expand the editing instruction while remaining semantically con-sistent with the source content. The refinement step aims to complement parts of the source image that are not explicitly described in the original prompts. In particular, the refined conditioning signals provide additional descriptions of background context, secondary objects and attributes, as well as scene compo-sition and style information that may be omitted in the original conditioning. To improve inversion stability and attention consistency, the generated source and target conditioning signals follow a shared structural format, ensuring that their semantic components remain aligned. This produces more descriptive and better-aligned conditioning signals for inversion-based editing. For reproducibility, the system prompts used for conditioning generation are included in the released codebase. We also provide the refined prompts for the full PIE-Bench dataset generated using Gemini-2.5-Pro with the same system prompts. Fig. 11–16 present examples of original and refined conditioning signals together with the resulting editing outputs. We observe that more descriptive conditioning signals generally improve background preservation and structural consistency in the edited images. 

Time Interval for Attention Manipulation 

The timestep interval over which attention manipulation is applied has a signifi-cant impact on editing behavior. To study this effect, we evaluate several manipu-lation intervals and report the editing performance under different manipulation intervals in Tab. 6. Experiment results demonstrate that as the manipulation interval becomes longer, more structural information from the source branch is injected into the generation process. This leads to improved background preser-vation, as reflected by better PSNR, SSIM, LPIPS, and MSE scores. However, the stronger structural injection also reduces semantic alignment with the target 24 Z. Zhan et al.      

> Fig. 9. Qualitative results of editing under different scales of attention reinforcement. A properly chosen scale λeffectively guides the generation of the desired content in the edited output, while an excessively large λcompromises the model’s generative capacity, leading to degraded results.

prompt, as indicated by the decrease in CLIP similarity. This reveals a trade-off between background preservation and editing fidelity. Based on the results in Tab. 6, we adopt the interval [0 − 4] , which provides a balanced compromise between structural preservation and semantic editing. 

Token-level attention control Token partition In order to perform accurate token-level attention control, we employ a Longest Common Subsequence (LCS) algorithm to align tokens in source and target prompts, which identifies the edit-relevant tokens k and edit-irrelevant tokens k. In this section, we provide the complete separating-token algorithm, including backtracking, in Alg. 3. The aligned token indices 

Ktgt identify the subset of target prompt tokens that are semantically shared with the source, which we designate as edit-irrelevant tokens k for attention replacement. Conversely, the remaining tokens in the target prompt that are not part of the LCS, which are identified as edit-relevant tokens k and serve as the focus of attention reinforcement. To examine the stability of our LCS-based token matching, we analyze the shared-token coverage between the source and target prompts under LCS align-ment. Tab. 7 reports the resulting statistics across the dataset. The average cov-erage reaches 90.2% for the source prompts and 78.3% for the target prompts, with the P10 coverage remaining above 77.2% and 65.4%, respectively. The Conditioning Matters for Diffusion Image Editing 25                                                        

> Interval Structure Background Preservation CLIP Similarity CLIP Similarity*
> Distance ↓PSNR ↑LPIPS ↓MSE ↓SSIM ↑Whole ↑Edited ↑Whole ↑Edited ↑
> 0–2 37.73 21.27 132.95 108.86 81.92 26.42 23.45 28.54 24.23 0–4 23.20 24.03 98.60 59.61 85.75 26.18 23.07 28.38 23.90 0–6 15.86 26.16 78.18 38.83 88.15 25.48 22.38 27.86 23.41 0–8 11.23 27.85 63.30 27.20 89.96 24.92 21.75 27.42 22.88

Table 6. Effect of manipulation interval on editing performance on PIE-Bench. Prompt Mean Median P10 P90 Source 90.2% 92.8% 77.2% 99.3% Target 78.3% 78.9% 65.4% 90.6% 

Table 7. Statistics of shared-token coverage rates. 

slightly lower target coverage is expected, as the refined target prompts con-tain additional tokens describing and emphasizing newly introduced seman-tics. This behavior arises because conditioning refinement produces semantically aligned source–target prompt pairs, allowing LCS matching to reliably capture the shared semantic components between them. These results indicate that LCS provides stable token-level alignment on the refined prompts and can robustly separate shared and edit-relevant tokens. 

Fig. 10. The degraded editing results of inversion-based editing on the PIE-Bench dataset when setting an emphasize scale of λ = 5 for attention reinforcement. 26 Z. Zhan et al. 

Algorithm 3 Token Alignment via LCS 

Input : Target ˆPtgt , Source ˆPsrc , Tokenizer T

Output : Structure-preserving token indices k and edit-driving token indices k

1: target_id ← T .encode ( ˆPtgt )

2: src_id ← T .encode ( ˆPsrc )

3: n ← | target_id |, m ← | src_id |

4: Initialize dp as zero matrix of size (n+1) × (m+1) 

5: for i = 0 to n−1 do 

6: for j = 0 to m−1 do 

7: if target_id [i] = src_id [j] then 

8: dp [i+1][ j+1] ← dp [i][ j] + 1 

9: else 

10: dp [i+1][ j+1] ← max( dp [i][ j+1] , dp [i+1][ j]) 

11: end if 

12: end for 

13: end for 

14: Ktgt ← [ ] , Ksrc ← [ ] 

15: i ← n, j ← m

16: while i > 0 and j > 0 do 

17: if target_id [i−1] = src_id [j−1] then 

18: Prepend i−1 to Ktgt 

19: Prepend j−1 to Ksrc 

20: i ← i−1, j ← j−1

21: else if dp [i−1][ j] ≥ dp [i][ j−1] then 

22: i ← i−1

23: else 

24: j ← j−1

25: end if 

26: end while 

27: k ← K tgt {structure-preserving tokens} 28: k ← { 0, . . . , n −1} \ K tgt {edit-driving tokens} 29: return k, k 

Attention Reinforcement Fig. 9 illustrates the effect of attention reinforce-ment in the proposed token-wise cross-branch attention control. As shown in Fig. 9, when refined conditioning signals become more descriptive, the increased token complexity may dilute the influence of edit-driving tokens during atten-tion computation. As a result, the generated output may fail to incorporate the intended semantic modification ( λ = 1 ). In practice, attention reinforcement in-creases the relative influence of edit-driving tokens in the attention computation, allowing the desired editing semantics to be more effectively injected into the generation process. As λ increases, the effect of attention reinforcement becomes progressively stronger, and the desired content gradually appears in the edited output, demonstrating the effectiveness of the proposed mechanism. However, when λ becomes too large, we observe noticeable degradation in image quality. We attribute this behavior to excessive attention scaling, which causes the at-Conditioning Matters for Diffusion Image Editing 27 

tention maps during generation to exceed the stable operating range of the base model and thereby compromises the generative capability of the FLUX back-bone. This effect is further amplified in inversion-based editing. Because the sampling process starts from inverted latents rather than Gaussian noise, the accumulated inversion errors make the subsequent generation trajectory more sensitive to strong attention perturbations. Consequently, excessive attention reinforcement is more likely to cause visual artifacts under this setting (as illus-trated in Fig. 10). Based on these observations, we adopt a relatively moderate reinforcement scale of λ = 3 in all experiments, which effectively enhances edit-ing semantics while avoiding visual artifacts or image degradation. 

## E. More qualitative results  

> Fig. 11. Example 1 of the effectiveness of our conditioning refinement strategy in image editing.

28 Z. Zhan et al. 

Fig. 12. Example 2 of the effectiveness of our conditioning refinement strategy in image editing. 

Fig. 13. Example 3 of the effectiveness of our conditioning refinement strategy in image editing. Conditioning Matters for Diffusion Image Editing 29 

Fig. 14. Example 4 of the effectiveness of our conditioning refinement strategy in image editing. 

Fig. 15. Example 5 of the effectiveness of our conditioning refinement strategy in image editing. 30 Z. Zhan et al. 

Fig. 16. Example 6 of the effectiveness of our conditioning refinement strategy in image editing.