Title: Learning Late, Guiding Early: Timestep-Decoupled Semantic Guidance for Fair Face Generation

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.25862v1

Published Time: Thu, 27 Aug 2026 01:07:56 GMT

Number of Pages: 20

Markdown Content:
# LEARNING LATE , G UIDING EARLY : T IMESTEP -D ECOUPLED 

# SEMANTIC GUIDANCE FOR FAIR FACE GENERATION 

Subir Kumar Parida ∗ Rajbabu Velmurugan † Ketan Kotwal †

R.S. Sengar ∗ Swati Hiremath ∗∗Bhabha Atomic Research Centre (B.A.R.C.), Mumbai, India 

> †

Department of Electrical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Bombay, Mumbai, India 

{subirkp,rssengar,swati}@barc.gov.in ; {rajbabu,ketan}@ee.iitb.ac.in 

August 27, 2026 

# ABSTRACT 

Demographic imbalance in synthetic face generation can propagate to downstream face recognition systems, making fairness an important consideration when diffusion models are used for data gen-eration. Existing fairness-aware generation approaches often require model retraining, architectural modifications, or repeated guidance throughout the reverse diffusion process. In this work, we intro-duce Semantic Boundary Predictor (SBP), an inference-time framework that performs demographic guidance through a one-shot intervention during reverse denoising. Our approach is motivated by the observation that latent representations at different diffusion timesteps play distinct semantic roles: late-stage latents provide stronger demographic separability, whereas early-stage latents offer greater flexibility for semantic intervention. SBP leverages this timestep decoupling by learning linear se-mantic boundaries from late-stage latent representations while applying them only once at the initial noisy latent, allowing the remainder of the reverse denoising process to proceed unchanged. The method requires neither retraining nor fine-tuning of the underlying Latent Diffusion Model and operates without external balanced datasets. Experiments on CelebA-HQ demonstrate substantial improvements in demographic fairness, reducing fairness disparity by 98% for gender, 95% for binary race, and 15% for four-class race, while maintaining perceptual image quality across demo-graphic groups. Owing to its one-shot inference strategy and model-agnostic design, SBP introduces only a small computational overhead and can be readily integrated with existing pre-trained latent diffusion models. 

Keywords Latent Diffusion Model · Demographic Fairness · Synthetic Data · Face Recognition · Generative AI ·

Inference-Time Guidance arXiv:2608.25862v1 [cs.CV] 26 Aug 2026 A PREPRINT - A UGUST 27, 2026 

# 1 Introduction 

Modern face recognition systems require large-scale datasets with wide variation in identity, age, expression, and appearance [1, 2], yet such data are difficult to obtain. Collecting real facial images at that scale is expensive and constrained by privacy, consent, ethics, copyright, regu-lation, and annotation cost [3]. Synthetic data has there-fore emerged as an attractive alternative because it is scal-able, privacy-preserving, cost-effective, and available on demand [4, 5]. That makes it relevant to face recognition, biometrics, face restoration, attribute recognition, age and expression analysis, and entertainment applications such as digital humans. Synthetic facial images have thus be-come a viable complement to real images for training modern vision systems, augmenting rather than replacing real-world data [6]. Early progress in synthetic face generation was driven by Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [7], with mod-els such as StyleGAN, StyleGAN2 enabling realistic face synthesis at scale [8]. More recently, diffusion models (DMs) [9, 10, 11] have gained popularity due to their abil-ity to generate images with higher fidelity and diversity. Synthetic datasets generated by these models, however, often inherit demographic biases from the data on which they were trained [12, 13]. For instance, unconditional face generation with a DM [14] trained on CelebA-HQ is highly skewed, with about 91% White, 66% female, and 92% young faces. This demographic imbalance per-sists despite the high visual realism of the generated im-ages, indicating that perceptual quality does not necessar-ily guarantee representative synthetic facial datasets [15]. This imbalance becomes especially important when syn-thetic data is used to train or fine-tune downstream face recognition systems. The impact of demographic bias extends beyond image generation. Once a recognition model is trained on synthetic data with uneven demo-graphic representation, the resulting decision boundaries can inherit the same disparities [16, 17, 12]. Severely im-balanced synthetic data can worsen representational bias and produce unequal performance across demographic groups, making data balance a necessary part of any re-sponsible synthetic-data pipeline [18, 19]. This growing emphasis is also reflected in recent benchmarking efforts such as the FRCSyn challenge, which evaluates genera-tive AI methods for synthetic face generation alongside face recognition systems trained using real data, synthetic data, or their combination. Beyond recognition accuracy, FRCSyn emphasizes on data privacy, and demographic fairness reflecting the growing interest in assessing syn-thetic data by its downstream utility rather than image quality alone [20, 21]. Recent works have started to examine synthetic face gen-eration not only through realism and recognition accuracy, but also through fairness, diversity, and downstream ef-fects [22]. Prior studies have analyzed demographic bias in GAN- and diffusion-based generators [15, 23, 24, 25], Reverse Diffusion (LDM) 

> steps
> Reverse Diffusion (LDM)
> steps
> Balanced Generation Transfer b
> . .

Figure 1: Conceptual overview of the proposed timestep-decoupled semantic guidance. A semantic boundary is learned at the semantically discriminative latent space at late-stage and transferred to the initial noisy latent space for one-shot guidance, enabling balanced image genera-tion without retraining. investigated how synthetic data affects subgroup perfor-mance in face recognition systems [26, 27], and proposed more controlled generation frameworks to increase diver-sity or reduce bias in synthetic data generation [28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33]. Many existing debiasing methods, how-ever, require diffusion model retraining, external balanced datasets, or architectural modifications [34, 35, 36]. Fairness-aware guidance provides an alternative to retraining-based approaches. Instead of modifying a pre-trained diffusion model itself, it steers the sampling trajec-tory at inference time toward a target demographic distri-bution [37, 38]. Existing guidance methods, however, rely on iterative guidance, repeatedly adjusting the generation process throughout the reverse denoising trajectory. To reduce this computational burden, we investigate how de-mographic information evolves across the denoising pro-cess of the Latent Diffusion Model (LDM). Our analy-sis shows that latent representations at different timesteps exhibit different semantic characteristics, which indicates that the reverse denoising process is not equally informa-tive for fairness-aware guidance at every stage. This sug-gests that semantic representations may be learned at one stage while guidance is applied at another . A de-tailed motivation for this analysis is presented in 3.2. Building on this insight, we design the Semantic Bound-ary Predictor (SBP) , a one-shot inference-time frame-work that decouples semantic boundary learning from semantic guidance across diffusion timesteps, as illus-trated in Fig. 1. Here, a semantic boundary refers to a linear decision boundary in latent space that separates de-mographic attributes. Semantic guidance denotes the per-turbation of latent representations along the correspond-ing boundary direction during sampling. SBP learns se-mantic boundaries from discriminative late-stage latent representations and applies them during the early denois-2A PREPRINT - A UGUST 27, 2026 ing stage, where guidance is applied only once before the remainder of the reverse diffusion process proceeds unchanged. Although the proposed framework consists of a semantic predictor and a single guidance step, it is important to evaluate whether such a simple design is sufficient to produce demographically balanced syn-thetic data while preserving image quality and maintain-ing computational efficiency. We will formalize the ques-tions later as research questions (RQ1–RQ4) alongside the proposed method and address them through experi-mental evaluation. SBP enables fairness-aware generation without retraining, fine-tuning, or requiring external bal-anced datasets. In summary, this work makes the following contributions: • We introduce Semantic Boundary Predictor (SBP), a timestep-decoupled inference-time guidance framework for demographic debiasing that learns semantic boundaries at late diffusion stages and applies them during early denoising without retraining or fine-tuning the diffusion model. • Our method eliminates the need for external datasets by operating solely on samples gener-ated by the biased diffusion model, providing a practical, model-agnostic solution for demo-graphic debiasing. • Experimental results show that the proposed approach improves demographic fairness while maintaining perceptually high-quality facial im-age generation. Image quality across over-represented and underrepresented groups is also maintained. 

# 2 Related Work 

Existing approaches for desired balanced demographic image generation in diffusion models can be broadly grouped into training-based and training-free methods. Training-based approaches improve fairness by retrain-ing the diffusion model or adding trainable components, whereas training-free approaches perform fairer demo-graphic generation at inference time without altering pre-trained models. We review both categories below and highlight their underlying methodologies, practical con-siderations, and trade-offs. 

2.1 Training-based Approaches 

Training-based approaches address bias in DMs by re-training the generative model or integrating auxiliary ar-chitectural components. D2C [39] employs contrastive self-supervised learning to train a semantic latent space. Diffusion Autoencoders (Diff-AE) [40] and PDAE [41] jointly train an encoder and a conditional DDPM decoder, yielding meaningful representations that support image reconstruction. Yang et al. [35] utilized an autoencoder and mutual information loss to disentangle latent repre-sentations, a strategy that works well for objects but strug-gles with face images. HDAE [36] builds on Diff-AE by introducing a hierarchical structure that captures low- and mid-level features in the learned latent space more effec-tively. Collectively, this family of methods condition im-age generation through learned semantic latent represen-tations. The additional training required to learn the latent representation, however, limits compatibility with exist-ing pre-trained diffusion models. 

2.2 Training-free Approaches 

Given the high computational cost and time requirements associated with training DMs, recent methods adopt post hoc strategies to achieve fair image generation without ad-ditional model training. In [28], Pal et al. employ Gaus-sian Mixture Models (GMMs) to localize the mean rep-resentations of facial attributes within the latent space of a diffusion model and generate balanced distributions. Unbiased-Diff [38] is an inference-time debiasing method that steers the reverse diffusion process toward balanced attribute distributions by incorporating a Fairness Dis-crepancy loss computed on predicted clean images at each denoising step. While this method avoids additional net-work training, it incurs substantial computational over-head because it computes image-space gradients at every step. Kwon et al. [42] showed that the bottleneck layer of a U-Net, known as the H-space, can serve as a latent semantic space, using CLIP [43] to identify directions within that space for precise image manipulation. Bal-ancing Act [37] extends this idea by training an attribute distribution predictor in the H-space with pseudo-labels from attribute classifiers to guide facial image generation toward a desired fair distribution. Its reliance on attribute classifiers to generate accurate pseudo-labels from the H-latent representation remains a key challenge. Guidance is also applied at every denoising step, which adds com-putational cost. Common paradigm with our proposed idea, Perera and Patel [38] and Parihar et al. [37] adopt inference-time dis-tribution guidance, where a batch of generated samples is steered toward a target demographic distribution through a differentiable fairness objective. The main difference lies in where and when the guidance is applied. Unbiased-Diff performs guidance in image space by reconstructing a clean image at every denoising step and evaluating it with off-the-shelf attribute classifiers. Balancing Act ap-plies guidance in the U-Net bottleneck, where a trained Attribute Distribution Predictor (ADP) maps latent fea-tures to demographic attribute distributions. Both meth-ods require iterative guidance throughout the reverse de-noising process, which creates computational overhead. Our approach also follows the inference-time distribution-guidance paradigm, but it departs from these methods by learning semantic boundaries from discriminative latent representations and applying a semantic guidance step at an appropriate single denoising stage. This one-shot 3A PREPRINT - A UGUST 27, 2026 Density 

Figure 2: Gender distribution of latent encodings across denoising timesteps, showing stronger demographic separa-tion in later stages. strategy removes repeated per-step corrections, thereby achieving fair demographic data generation with a lower computational cost. 

# 3 Proposed Approach 

Our framework is motivated by the observation that the reverse denoising process of the LDM exhibits different semantic characteristics across timesteps. Early denois-ing stages mainly determine high-level semantic attributes such as identity and demographics [44, 45, 46, 47], yet the corresponding latent representations remain highly noisy. By contrast, the final denoising stages produce semanti-cally discriminative latent representations that allow reli-able estimation of demographic decision boundaries. We therefore decouple semantic boundary learning from se-mantic guidance by learning attribute-specific boundaries from discriminative late-stage latent representations and then transferring them to early denoising stages, where demographic attributes remain more amenable to manipu-lation. This enables effective inference-time demographic guidance without modifying or retraining the pre-trained diffusion model. The remainder of this section introduces the notation and inference pipeline, motivates timestep-decoupled guid-ance, presents SBP, and concludes with a PCA-based im-plementation for efficient inference. 

3.1 Notations and Pipeline 

Let Zt = {z1 

> t

, z2 

> t

, . . . , zNt } denote a set of N latent ten-sors at timestep t, where t ∈ { T, T − 1, . . . , 1, 0} and 

T is the initial timestep of the reverse diffusion process. The initial latent tensors ZT are sampled from a standard Gaussian distribution, i.e. , ZT ∼ N (0 , I). Through re-verse diffusion, these latents are progressively denoised to obtain final latent representations Z0, which are decoded by the frozen LDM decoder D to produce facial images 

˜xi = D(zi

> 0

).Each generated image ˜xi is assigned a demographic at-tribute using an attribute classifier A, such that A : ˜ xi →

yi. We consider three demographic attributes: gender, race, and age. Gender is treated as a binary attribute (male or female), while race is evaluated in both bi-nary (Black/White) and four-class (White, Black, Asian, Indian) settings. Age is categorized into three groups: young, adult, and old. The predicted demographic labels are mapped back to their corresponding latent representations to construct datasets of the form: 

Dt = {(z it , y i)}Ni=1 

where a separate dataset is constructed for each demo-graphic attribute (gender, race, or age). These datasets are then used to learn the corresponding semantic boundaries. 

3.2 Why Timestep-Decoupled Guidance? 

The proposed timestep-decoupled guidance strategy is motivated by how semantic information evolves through-out the reverse denoising process. We hypothesize that demographic attributes are easier to manipulate during early denoising stages, while latent representations be-come more discriminative as denoising progresses. To test this hypothesis, we analyzed the evolution of the distribution of a demographic attribute, gender, in latent encodings over denoising timesteps, as shown in Fig. 2. We chose gender given its binary nature and, therefore, easier to analyze than multi-class attributes such as race or age. The plots show that the latent distributions of both male and female demographic groups initially over-lap substantially, making them difficult to separate with a linear decision boundary. As denoising proceeds, the overlap steadily decreases, the class means diverge, and the SVM decision boundary becomes more discrimina-tive. By the final denoising stages, the two distributions form well-separated clusters, indicating that demographic information is encoded much more distinctly in late-stage latent representations. These results confirm our hypothe-sis that the semantic discriminability of latent representa-tions depends strongly on the timestep. The observations above reveal an inherent trade-off in inference-time demographic guidance. Latent represen-tations at late stages exhibit strong semantic separabil-ity, which supports robust decision-boundary learning, but modifying them can disrupt the denoising trajectory and degrade image quality. Early-stage latent representa-tions are more suitable for semantic manipulation because high-level attributes remain controllable, but their strong semantic overlap makes reliable boundary estimation dif-ficult. We therefore argue that semantic boundary learning 4A PREPRINT - A UGUST 27, 2026 Frozen LDM   

> ( At timestep )
> Attribute Classifier Construct
> Dataset
> Semantic boundary for demographic attribute
> Decoder
> Reverse Diffusion steps
> Attribute labels ( race, gender, age ) Paired latent-label dataset Used for Guidance during Generation
> Synthesized images
> 1) Image Generation 2) Labelling + Dataset Construction 3) Semantic Boundary Learning

Figure 3: Overview of SBP learning pipeline. (1) A pre-trained frozen LDM generates synthetic facial images. (2) The attribute classifier predicts demographic labels for the generated images. The predicted labels are paired with the corresponding latent representations to construct attribute-specific training datasets. (3) An independent Semantic Boundary Predictor (SBP) is trained for each demographic attribute, producing one semantic boundary vector per attribute for inference-time guidance. and semantic guidance do not need to occur at the same diffusion timestep. Instead, semantic boundaries can be learned from highly discriminative late-stage latent repre-sentations and then transferred to early denoising stages, where demographic attributes are relatively easily con-trollable. This insight motivates the proposed Seman-tic Boundary Predictor (SBP), which decouples semantic boundary learning from semantic guidance and enables inference-time fair demographic data generation without retraining or fine-tuning the pre-trained diffusion model. The framework itself is a simple, yet effective idea. Rather than increasing architectural complexity, we ask whether a lightweight semantic predictor is enough to exploit the evolving semantics of the diffusion process for fairness-aware generation. This leads to four re-search questions that guide the design and evaluation of the framework: RQ1: Can a simple semantic boundary predictor consistently improve fairness across individual demographic attributes? RQ2: Can the guidance strat-egy generalize from individual attributes to simultaneous multi-attribute generation? RQ3: Can demographic fair-ness be improved while preserving the perceptual quality of generated images? RQ4: What is the computational cost of achieving fairness through one-shot guidance? 

3.3 Semantic Boundary Predictor 

Given the training set D0, our objective is to estimate a se-mantic decision boundary for each demographic attribute, namely gender, race, and age. Since the latent representa-tions at the final denoising timestep ( t = 0 ) exhibit strong semantic separability, we model each boundary with a lightweight linear classifier, referred to as the Semantic Boundary Predictor (SBP) .The SBP model learns a semantic decision boundary from the latent representations in D0. For each demographic attribute, the learned boundary is represented by a normal vector b, which separates the corresponding demographic classes in latent space. Formally, SBP learns the decision function 

f (z0) = b⊤z0 + c (1) where b denotes the normal vector of the learned semantic boundary and c is the bias term. The normal vector cap-tures the direction of maximum semantic discrimination in latent space and is later used to guide image generation during inference. Figure 3 illustrates SBP learning process. First, afrozen pre-trained LDM generates a set of synthetic facial images. Next, the attribute classifier predicts the demographic labels (race, gender, and age) for each generated image. Those predicted labels are then paired with the latent representations corresponding to the images to build an attribute-specific training dataset. Finally, an independent Semantic Boundary Predictor (SBP), implemented as a lightweight linear classifier, is trained for each demographic attribute to learn its semantic decision boundary. The resulting classifiers produce one learned boundary vector per attribute, which 5A PREPRINT - A UGUST 27, 2026 

Algorithm 1 Inference Using Timestep-Decoupled Se-mantic Guidance 

Input: Noise prediction model ϵθ (·, t ), decoder D, se-mantic boundary vector b, guidance strength δ, batch size 

N , initial denoising timestep T 

> 1:

Sample an initial latent batch 

ZT = {z1 

> T

, . . . , zNT },

where z iT ∼ N (0 , I) ▷ Initialize latent batch  

> 2:

Select the sign of δ according to the target demo-graphic  

> 3:

Apply semantic guidance to the entire batch 

ZT ← ZT ± δb 

> 4:

for t = T, T − 1, . . . , 1 do  

> 5:

Sample ϵ ∼ N (0 , I) if t > 1, else ϵ = 0  

> 6:

Compute: 

Zt−1 = 1

√αt



Zt − 1 − αt

√1 − ¯αt

ϵθ (Zt, t )



+ σtϵ▷ Reverse diffusion update  

> 7:

end for  

> 8:

Decode the final latent batch 

˜X = D(Z0) = {˜x1, . . . , ˜xN } 

> 9:

return ˜X

is then used during inference for demographic guidance. The pre-trained diffusion model remains unchanged, and all semantic control is achieved through a single inference-time perturbation in latent space. 

Timestep-Decoupled Guidance: Once semantic bound-aries have been learned, they are used to guide the reverse diffusion process during inference. Rather than modifying the diffusion model itself, SBP performs a single latent-space guidance step before reverse denoising begins. Given an initial latent batch ZT ∼ N (0 , I), the learned semantic boundary is applied as 

ZT ← ZT ± δb (2) where b is the unit normal vector learned by SBP and 

δ ∈ Z≥0 controls the strength of the semantic guidance, and the sign is chosen according to the target demographic class. Setting δ = 0 disables semantic guidance, reducing the sampling process to the original pre-trained LDM. The guided latent batch ZT is then propagated through the standard reverse diffusion process without further inter-vention, yielding the final latent representation Z0, which is decoded into the generated images. The pseudocode of the timestep-decoupled guidance procedure is presented in Alg. 1. 

3.4 Feature Subspace Projection 

The latent representations produced by the LDM, once flattened, are high-dimensional, which makes semantic boundary learning and inference computationally expen-sive. To reduce this cost, we employ a compact-subspace variant of SBP that performs semantic boundary learning and guidance in a PCA subspace instead of the original la-tent space. Specifically, we project latent features onto the leading K principal components, reducing both computa-tion and memory while preserving the dominant semantic information. The effectiveness of this approach comes from the intrin-sic compactness of late-stage latent representations. As illustrated by experiments in Sec. 4.4, these representa-tions require far fewer principal components to preserve dominant variance than early-stage representations. We therefore learn and apply semantic boundaries in a low-dimensional subspace with negligible information loss, making SBP more efficient without compromising its ef-fectiveness. 

# 4 Experiments 

This section presents the experimental setup used to eval-uate the proposed fairness-aware generation framework, including the dataset, evaluation metrics for fairness, per-ceptual quality, and computational efficiency, the attribute classifier, implementation details, and the evaluation pro-tocol. 

4.1 Experimental Setup and Evaluation Metrics Dataset: We train SBP exclusively on samples generated by frozen LDMs, without modifying its weights or requiring additional training data. We perform exper-iments using LDMs trained on CelebA-HQ [48] and FFHQ [8]. CelebA-HQ contains 30,000 facial images of size 256 × 256 and is known to exhibit demographic imbalance because it was curated from celebrity images collected from the internet [49]. FFHQ contains 70,000 high-quality facial images with greater diversity in age, ethnicity, and appearance. For each experiment, the corresponding training dataset is used as the reference set for FID computation. 

Diffusion Model: We use the official pre-trained LDMs [14] trained on CelebA-HQ 1 and FFHQ 2. Both mod-els were trained using a diffusion process with 1000 timesteps. During inference, we employ DDIM sampling with 50 reverse denoising steps, following the standard sampling configuration. We treat the LDM as a white-box model and perform fairness-aware image generation 

> 1https://ommer-lab.com/files/ latent-diffusion/celeba.zip
> 2https://ommer-lab.com/files/ latent-diffusion/ffhq.zip

6A PREPRINT - A UGUST 27, 2026 solely through inference-time latent-space manipulation, without modifying its weights or training procedure. 

Attribute Classifier: We predict demographic labels us-ing the FairFace [49] classifier, a ResNet model trained on the balanced FairFace dataset. Its balanced training distribution helps minimize classifier-induced bias when evaluating generated samples. For experiments using the CelebA-HQ LDM, we adopt the binary gender labels provided by CelebA-HQ. Age is divided into three groups: young (10–29 years), adult (30–59 years), and old (60+ years). Race is grouped into four classes: White, Black, Indian, and Asian. We also perform an analysis with a binary race classification, where “White" remains unchanged and “Black" includes individuals from both Black and Indian ethnicities, fol-lowing prior work [37]. The same demographic protocol is used for experiments with the FFHQ-trained LDM. 

Evaluation Metrics: Perceptual quality is measured us-ing the Fréchet Inception Distance (FID) [50]. Following standard practice, we compute FID 3 against an attribute-balanced subset of the corresponding training dataset (CelebA-HQ or FFHQ) used by the pre-trained LDM. Fairness is evaluated using Fairness Discrepancy (FD) [51], defined as the ℓ2 distance || u−y|| 2 between the pre-dicted demographic distribution y and the target uniform distribution u, where lower values indicate fairer demo-graphic distributions. Computational efficiency is mea-sured using sampling throughput, defined as T = N/ ∆t,where N denotes the number of generated samples and 

∆t is the total generation time. Throughput is hardware-dependent and measured in samples per second (sam-ples/s). 

4.2 Implementation details SBP Training: To learn semantic decision boundaries, we first generated a synthetic dataset by sampling facial images with the pre-trained LDM and then predicted their demographic attributes. Through empirical analysis, we found that a training set of 15,000 generated samples pro-vides sufficient semantic diversity for reliable boundary learning (see Section 4.6 for details). We extract the cor-responding latent representations in the final denoising timestep ( t = 0 ), where semantic information is most dis-criminative. We used 50% of the data for training and 50% for validation during boundary learning. We implement SBP 4 as a lightweight single-layer linear classifier operating on the 5,000-dimensional PCA feature subspace. For binary attributes (gender and binary race), we use a single sigmoid output neuron, whereas for multi-class race and age prediction, we use four-way  

> 3Official GitHub repository: https://github.com/ mseitzer/pytorch-fid
> 4We intend to publicly release the source code and trained SBPs upon acceptance of this paper

Table 1: SBP Classifier Accuracy vs. Denoising Timestep Attributes T = 50 T = 40 T = 25 T = 10 T = 0 gender 0.59 0.63 0.81 0.95 0.97 

race (2-class) 0.71 0.77 0.88 0.91 0.92 

race (4-class) 0.71 0.75 0.77 0.90 0.91 

age 0.73 0.82 0.91 0.94 0.95 

and three-way softmax outputs, respectively. We train all classifiers using stochastic gradient descent (SGD) with a learning rate of 1 × 10 −3, momentum of 0.9, and a weight decay of 5 × 10 −4. All models are trained until convergence, with early stopping applied when the validation accuracy did not improve for 50 consecutive epochs. 

Inference Pipeline: During inference, we apply the learned semantic boundary corresponding to the target de-mographic attribute to the initial Gaussian latent prior be-fore reverse diffusion begins. Specifically, the unit nor-mal vector of the selected semantic boundary is scaled by a positive guidance strength δ and added to or subtracted from the randomly sampled latent code, producing a mod-ified latent representation that serves as input to the frozen diffusion model. Unless otherwise stated, we use the same inference pro-cedure for every demographic attribute in all experiments. The guidance strength δ ∈ Z≥0 controls the magnitude of semantic intervention, where the choice of positive or negative direction ( ±) determines the side of the learned semantic boundary toward which the sampling process is steered. The two directions therefore increase or de-crease the likelihood of generating the corresponding de-mographic attribute. We select the value of δ based on the ablation study presented in Section 4.6. We conduct all experiments using PyTorch on a worksta-tion equipped with an NVIDIA A100 GPU with 40 GB memory. Training the lightweight SBPs incurs negligible computational overhead compared with diffusion model inference. 

4.3 Timestep-Dependent Semantic Structure in LDMs 

We examine our hypothesis that demographic semantics become progressively more discriminative during reverse denoising by evaluating the semantic separability of latent representations across denoising timesteps. We train an SBP classifier to predict demographic attributes at differ-ent denoising timesteps. The classification accuracies are reported in Tab. 1. We observe a clear pattern: prediction accuracy consistently improves as denoising progresses. For example, the gender classification rises from 59% at (t=50) to 97% at (t=0), while the four-class race classifier improves from 71% to 91%. Similar trends appear for the 7A PREPRINT - A UGUST 27, 2026 

Figure 4: Late-stage latent representations require sub-stantially fewer principal components to preserve the dominant variance than early-stage representations, indi-cating stronger semantic compactness. This observation supports learning semantic boundaries from late diffusion timesteps in the proposed timestep-decoupled guidance framework. remaining demographic attributes. This steady increase in classification accuracy indicates that latent representa-tions become increasingly linearly separable during the reverse denoising process. These findings are consistent with the distribution anal-ysis presented in Fig. 2, where the overlap between de-mographic groups progressively decreases and the corre-sponding decision boundary becomes more discrimina-tive at later denoising stages. As the latent distributions separate more clearly, the semantic boundary can be esti-mated with higher confidence, which improves classifica-tion accuracy. This observation motivates our decision to learn semantic boundaries from late-stage latent represen-tations, where semantic discriminability is highest. 

4.4 Analysis of Latent Feature Compactness 

To determine an appropriate feature subspace for seman-tic boundary learning, we analyze the cumulative variance explained by the principal components extracted from la-tent representations at different diffusion timesteps. Fig-ure 4 shows that latent representations in t = 0 become highly compact after projection, with approximately 92% of the variance preserved by 40% of principal components (5,000 out of 12,288). Increasing dimensionality beyond that point provides only marginal gains while substan-tially increasing computational cost. We therefore use this subspace in all subsequent experiments. By contrast, latent representations extracted from the early diffusion stage ( t = 50 ) require substantially more principal components, approximately 8,000, to achieve comparable variance preservation. This indicates that early latent representations remain dominated by noisy and dispersed variation, whereas semantic information be-comes progressively concentrated as the reverse diffusion process converges. These observations further support our timestep-decoupled design, in which semantic boundaries Table 2: Quantitative comparison of demographic fairness (FD ↓) and perceptual quality (FID ↓) for gender genera-tion. Methods are compared with the corresponding pre-trained DM trained on the same dataset. 

Method FD ↓ FID ↓

Pre-trained DM (FFHQ) 0.212 -Gaussian Harmony [28] 0.127 -Pre-trained DM (FFHQ) 0.109 78.44 Unbiased-Diff [38] 0.021 78.23 Pre-trained DM (FFHQ) 0.068 17.45 SBP (ours) 0.006 18.41 Pre-trained DM (CelebA) 0.178 54.59 Balancing Act [37] 0.049 50.27 Pre-trained DM (CelebA) 0.051 34.66 SBP (ours) 0.001 31.54 are learned from late-stage latent representations that ex-hibit stronger compactness and semantic separability. 

4.5 Evaluation and Comparisons 

We evaluate SBP on five controlled generation tasks: gender, binary race (Black/White), four-class race (White, Black, Asian, Indian), age, and multi-attribute generation (Gender + Race). These attributes were selected since they are the demographic characteristics most commonly studied in fairness-aware face generation and because they span both binary and multi-class semantic-control problems. We compare SBP with three prominent diffusion-based debiasing approaches, Gaussian Har-mony [28], Unbiased-Diff [38], and Balancing Act [37], along with the original pre-trained diffusion model under random sampling. Whenever available, we use the quantitative results reported in the original papers. For experiments related to the sampling throughput of Diff-AE and the Balancing Act, and the FID evalua-tion of the Balancing Act for the gender attribute, we reproduced the corresponding results using the official implementations and the released checkpoints. To ensure a consistent evaluation, we generated 10,000 images per demographic group and assessed their performance using the metrics described in Sec. 4.1. FID is computed using attribute-wise balanced subsets sampled from the original training distribution. The remainder of this section first evaluates demographic fairness across individual attributes, including gender, race, and age, followed by multi-attribute generation, perceptual quality, and computational efficiency. 

Gender: Gender is one of the most widely studied de-mographic attributes in fairness-aware face generation be-cause large-scale facial datasets often exhibit noticeable 8A PREPRINT - A UGUST 27, 2026 

Figure 5: Samples generated with our approach effectively address gender bias by producing an equal distribution of faces: approximately 51% female above the yellow line and 49% male below. Additionally, the generated faces exhibit higher perceptual quality, as reflected by the FID score. Table 3: Quantitative comparison of demographic fairness (FD ↓) and perceptual quality (FID ↓) for racial generation.                                          

> Method Race (B+W) Race (4-class)
> FD ↓FID ↓FD ↓FID ↓
> Pre-trained DM (FairFace) --0.393 -Gaussian Harmony [28] --0.177 -Pre-trained DM (FairFace) --0.222 58.98 Unbiased-Diff [38] --0.014 59.24 Pre-trained DM (CelebA) 0.334 60.01 0.292 89.14 Balancing Act [37] 0.113 52.38 0.264 91.54 Pre-trained DM (CelebA) 0.387 39.46 0.289 34.48 SBP (ours) 0.018 37.11 0.247 34.80

gender imbalance. Previous studies have shown that dif-fusion models trained on datasets such as CelebA-HQ and FFHQ disproportionately generate female faces dur-ing unconditional sampling, making gender an important benchmark for evaluating demographic fairness. Table 2 compares SBP with existing diffusion-based de-biasing approaches using their respective pre-trained dif-fusion models. On CelebA-HQ, SBP reduces the fair-ness disparity from 0.051 to 0.001, corresponding to an approximately 98% reduction, while also improving the FID from 34.66 to 31.54. The same trend is observed on FFHQ, where SBP reduces the fairness disparity by ap-proximately 91%, with only a marginal increase in FID. The reported methods are evaluated on different pre-trained diffusion models, so comparisons should be made within the corresponding training setting. Compared with Gaussian Harmony [28] and Unbiased-Diff [38], both trained on FFHQ, SBP achieves the lowest fairness dis-crepancy. A direct FID comparison with Gaussian Har-mony is not possible since image quality results are not reported. Compared with Balancing Act [37], trained on CelebA-HQ, SBP achieves a lower fairness disparity and better image quality. Figure 5 presents some examples generated using SBP. We randomly sampled 100 noise samples and applied our decoupled guidance method. Whereas the original LDM predominantly generates female faces during unconditional sampling, SBP produces an approximately balanced distribution (51% female and 49% male) while preserving facial diversity and visual realism. These results demonstrate that a single inference-time semantic guidance step is enough to regulate gender representation effectively without modifying the pre-trained diffusion model. 

Race: Race is a more challenging fairness setting than gender because it requires balancing multiple demo-graphic groups at once. To evaluate whether timestep-decoupled guidance generalizes beyond binary semantic control, we consider a four-class race setting with White, Black, Asian, and Indian identities. For direct compar-ison with earlier work, we also construct a binary race setting (White and Black) following Parihar et al. [37], where Brown faces are grouped under the Black category. We report the quantitative results in Tab. 3. In the bi-nary race setting, SBP reduces the fairness disparity by approximately 95% relative to the original CelebA-HQ pre-trained LDM while maintaining a comparable level of image quality. The four-class setting is inherently more difficult because demographic overlap increases as addi-tional groups are considered. Even under this setting, SBP continues to improve demographic balance, achieving a 15% reduction in fairness disparity while preserving per-ceptual quality. The reported methods are evaluated using different pre-trained diffusion models and should therefore be com-pared within the corresponding experimental setting. Gaussian Harmony [28] and Unbiased-Diff [38] use DMs trained on FairFace and report results only for the four-class race setting. Balancing Act [37] and our method, by contrast, are based on CelebA-HQ and evaluate the binary race task. Within the CelebA-HQ setting, SBP achieves a substantially lower fairness disparity than Bal-ancing Act while maintaining comparable image quality. For the four-class task, although direct comparison across datasets is not appropriate, SBP consistently improves de-mographic balance over the original pre-trained LDM. 9A PREPRINT - A UGUST 27, 2026 Table 4: Quantitative comparison of demographic fairness (FD ↓) and perceptual quality (FID ↓) for age generation. 

Method FD ↓ FID ↓

Pre-trained DM (CelebA) 0.256 60.68 Balancing Act [37] 0.283 71.84 Pre-trained DM (CelebA) 0.450 46.01 SBP (ours) 0.135 36.98 These results demonstrate that timestep-decoupled guidance is not limited to simple binary attributes and generalizes well to more complex demographic distribu-tions. The consistent improvement across the two race settings indicates that the learned semantic boundaries remain informative even as the demographic distribution becomes more complex. 

Age: Age differs from gender and race since it forms a gradual semantic continuum rather than a discrete demo-graphic attribute. We report the quantitative comparison in Tab. 4. Both SBP and Balancing Act [37] use dif-fusion models trained on CelebA-HQ, enabling a direct comparison under the same experimental setting. To the best of our knowledge, age has received relatively lim-ited attention in diffusion-based fairness-aware face gen-eration compared with gender and race. SBP achieves the lowest fairness disparity while preserv-ing image quality. The reduction in fairness disparity is smaller than that observed for gender and binary race, reflecting the increased semantic overlap among the three age groups. Nevertheless, SBP consistently improves demographic balance over both the original pre-trained LDM and Balancing Act, indicating that timestep-decoupled guidance remains effective for attributes with gradual semantic variation. 

Discussion (RQ1): The results in Tables 2, 3, 4 demon-strate that SBP consistently improves demographic fairness across gender, binary race, four-class race, and age while preserving perceptual quality. These findings confirm that a simple semantic boundary predictor learned from latent representations from late-stage is suf-ficient for effective inference-time demographic control. 

Multi-attribute generation: Real-world synthetic datasets often require multiple demographic attributes to be balanced simultaneously rather than independently. We therefore evaluate SBP jointly on gender and race generation to test whether the proposed guidance remains effective under compositional semantic control. We report the quantitative results in Tab. 5. Within the CelebA-HQ setting, SBP achieves the lowest fairness disparity (FD = 0.055), corresponding to a 78% reduc-tion relative to random sampling (FD = 0.256) and a fur-Table 5: Evaluation of FD and FID scores for multi-attribute generation. The best score is highlighted in bold .Attribute Gender + Race 

Method FD ↓ FID ↓

Random Sampling 0.256 60.68 Balancing Act [37] 0.075 49.91 SBP (ours) 0.055 45.16 

ther 26% reduction compared with Balancing Act (FD = 0.075). At the same time, SBP improves image quality, reducing the FID from 49.91 to 45.16 compared with Bal-ancing Act. Compared with balancing individual attributes, the fairness disparity naturally increases when gender and race are optimized jointly. For SBP, the FD increases from 0.001 for gender and 0.009 for binary race to 0.055 for joint gender–race generation, reflecting the increased difficulty of simultaneously satisfying multiple demographic constraints. Despite this increase, SBP consistently maintains a more balanced demographic distribution than both the original sampling process and the existing inference-time baseline. 

Discussion (RQ2): The results in Tab. 5 demon-strate that the proposed semantic guidance strategy generalizes beyond individual demographic attributes, enabling simultaneous control of multiple attributes without retraining or modifying the underlying diffusion model. This finding indicates that the learned semantic boundaries remain effective even under compositional demographic guidance. 

Fairness versus Image Quality: To examine whether demographic balancing affects perceptual quality across demographic groups, we evaluate FID independently of fairness using balanced subsets of CelebA-HQ for each demographic attribute. The corresponding results are re-ported in Tab. 6. Overall, SBP preserves image quality while improving demographic fairness. For gender, image quality re-mains comparable to the original LDM, with only modest changes in FID across both categories. Compared with the publicly available Balancing Act checkpoint †, SBP pro-duces substantially lower FID for both male (33.91 vs. 90.02) and female (38.13 vs. 40.20) faces. The largest quality improvements are observed for race and age. Averaged across the four racial groups, the FID decreases from 59.76 to 45.45 (approximately 24%), while the average FID across the three age groups decreases from 57.43 to 42.52 (approximately 26%). The largest gains occur for previously underrepresented groups, including Indian, Asian, young, and old faces, 10 A PREPRINT - A UGUST 27, 2026 Table 6: Evaluation of perceptual image quality (FID scores) for balanced generated samples across various demo-graphics. The best score per metric is emphasized in bold .Attribute Gender Race Age 

Category Male Female White Black Indian Asian Young Adult Old Random Sampling 35.14 31.11 30.84 58.82 76.74 72.62 71.04 30.13 71.11 Balancing Act [37] 90.02 † 40.20 † - - - - - - -SBP (ours) 33.91 38.13 34.24 45.78 50.60 51.17 48.09 32.44 47.03 

Table 7: Computational Efficiency Comparison. Sam-pling throughput was measured in samples/sec. on a sin-gle NVIDIA A100. 

Method Sampling throughput samples/sec. ↑

Random Sampling [14] 1.56 Diff-AE [40] 0.30 †

Unbiased-Diff [38] 0.26 Balancing Act [37] 1.45 †

SBP (ours) 1.41 whereas the dominant White and adult categories exhibit only small changes. This trend suggests that the proposed semantic guidance primarily improves image quality for demographics that are underrepresented in the original diffusion model while preserving the quality of already well-represented groups. 

Discussion (RQ3): The perceptual quality evaluation in Tab. 6 shows that the proposed inference-time guidance preserves the visual realism of generated images while substantially improving demographic fairness. Larger guidance strengths may modestly increase FID, but an appropriate choice of the guidance strength yields an effective fairness-quality trade-off. 

Computational Efficiency: Although fairness is the pri-mary objective, inference-time efficiency is also relevant for practical deployment. The sampling throughput of SBP is compared with representative diffusion-based de-biasing methods in Tab. 7. Throughput is reported at a res-olution of 256 × 256 pixels and measured in samples per second on a single NVIDIA A100 GPU. For Diff-AE [40] and Balancing Act [37], the reported values were obtained using the official checkpoints released by the respective authors †.The evaluated methods are based on different diffusion architectures, and the reported throughput should there-fore be interpreted within that context. In particular, 

> †The reported values were obtained by evaluating the official checkpoints released by the respective authors.

Table 8: Effect of δ on Gender Debiasing. Scale δ 0 1 2 3 4 5FD ↓ 0.051 0.039 0.024 0.013 0.001 0.001 FID ↓ 34.66 34.78 32.52 30.17 31.54 33.2 Unbiased-Diff [38] employs a DDPM backbone rather than an LDM, making direct architectural comparisons less meaningful. Its throughput is included for reference. SBP generates 1.41 samples/sec., compared with 1.56 samples/sec. for the original LDM and 1.45 samples/sec. for Balancing Act. The modest reduction relative to the original model arises from the additional latent-space guidance step applied before reverse denoising. In contrast, Diff-AE reports a substantially lower throughput (0.30 samples/sec.). These results indicate that the proposed guidance introduces little additional inference overhead while maintaining sampling speeds comparable to existing inference-time approaches. 

Discussion (RQ4): The throughput results show that the fairness improvements obtained with SBP require only a modest additional inference cost. SBP performs a single latent-space intervention before reverse diffusion, result-ing in sampling speeds that remain close to the original LDM and comparable to existing inference-time guidance methods. 

4.6 Ablation Study 

During inference, SBP requires only one hyperparameter, the guidance strength δ, which determines the magni-tude of the latent-space shift orthogonal to the learned semantic boundary. Its effect is intuitive: setting a larger value produces a stronger semantic intervention, whereas smaller values yield more conservative adjustments. Since δ directly influences both demographic balance and perceptual quality, we first examine its effect. The only additional design choice is the number of latent-attribute pairs used to learn the semantic boundary during SBP training. Together, these two parameters constitute the complete set of tunable components in SBP, making the method straightforward to configure in practice. 11 A PREPRINT - A UGUST 27, 2026 

Effect of Guidance Strength: The guidance strength 

δ determines the magnitude of the latent-space perturba-tion applied orthogonal to the learned semantic boundary before reverse diffusion. Setting δ = 0 disables semantic guidance entirely, reducing SBP to the original pre-trained LDM with standard random sampling. Larger values pro-gressively increase the influence of the learned semantic boundary on the generated samples. We report the effect of varying δ for gender generation in Table 8. As δ increases from 0 to 4, the fairness dis-parity decreases from 0.051 to 0.001, corresponding to an approximately 98% reduction. Over the same range, the FID initially improves from 34.66 to 31.54, indicat-ing that moderate semantic guidance can improve both demographic balance and image quality. Increasing the guidance further ( δ = 5 ) produces no additional reduc-tion in fairness disparity while increasing the FID from 31.54 to 33.20, suggesting that excessively strong guid-ance offers little benefit once demographic balance has been achieved. A similar pattern is observed in four-class race genera-tion, as illustrated in Fig. 6. Increasing δ progressively increases the representation of the underrepresented demographic groups, particularly the Black and Asian categories. Beyond intermediate guidance strengths, how-ever, the improvement in demographic balance becomes progressively smaller, while perceptual quality begins to deteriorate. These observations suggest that moderate values of δ provide the best balance between fairness and image quality across different demographic attributes. 

Effect of SBP Training Sample Size: The only training-related design choice in SBP is the number of latent-attribute pairs used to learn the semantic boundary. Table 9 evaluates three training set sizes for the gender attribute. Increasing the training set from 5,000 to 15,000 sam-ples reduces the fairness disparity from 0.002 to 0.001 while improving the FID from 36.27 to 31.54. Expand-ing the training set further to 45,000 samples produces only a marginal improvement in FID (31.54 to 31.46), 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14           

> Scale ( )
> 20 40 60 80 100
> Generation Percentage (%)
> (a)
> White Black Asian Indian
> 678910 11 12 13 14
> Scale ( )
> 35 40 45 50 55
> FID (  )
> (b)
> White Black Asian Indian

Figure 6: (a) Generation percentage vs. δ, (b) FID vs. 

δ. Effect of the guidance strength δ on demographic fair-ness (FD) and perceptual quality (FID) for four-class race generation. Increasing δ strengthens semantic guidance, improving demographic balance while gradually reducing image fidelity beyond the optimal operating point. Table 9: Influence of SBP training sample size on the final generation performance measured using FD and FID. Training Set Size FD ↓ FID ↓

5,000 0.002 36.27 15,000 0.001 31.54 45,000 0.001 31.46 

while the fairness disparity remains unchanged. These re-sults indicate that the semantic boundary converges with a relatively modest number of training samples, mak-ing SBP inexpensive to train despite operating in a high-dimensional latent space. 

# 5 Limitations 

The proposed SBP learns a separate semantic boundary for each demographic attribute. Although each boundary can be estimated efficiently from a relatively small num-ber of generated samples, supporting additional attributes requires training and maintaining multiple SBPs. Fur-thermore, boundary learning depends on external attribute classifiers, so errors or demographic bias in the predicted labels can directly affect the learned semantic boundaries. Our design is motivated by the distinct semantic roles of the two extreme stages of the denoising process. Ac-cordingly, all experiments learn the semantic boundary from the final denoising timestep and apply it at the initial noisy latent. This strategy consistently improves fairness across all evaluated settings. However, the intermediate timesteps were not examined in this work. Future work will investigate whether learning seman-tic boundaries at intermediate denoising timesteps could yield better transferability or achieve a more favorable balance between demographic fairness and image qual-ity. Another promising direction is to extend the timestep-decoupled semantic guidance beyond demographic at-tributes to more subtle semantic characteristics. 

# 6 Conclusion 

In this work, we presented SBP, a one-shot inference-time framework for generating fairness aware samples using la-tent diffusion models. Our analysis showed that late-stage latent representations are well suited for learning seman-tic boundaries, whereas early denoising stages provide greater flexibility for semantic guidance. Building on this observation, we introduced a timestep-decoupled seman-tic guidance strategy that separates semantic boundary learning from semantic intervention across the denoising process. SBP learns semantic boundaries from late-stage latents and transfers them to the initial noisy latent, where a single guidance step steers the reverse diffusion process toward demographically balanced image generation with-out modifying the remaining denoising trajectory. Ex-12 A PREPRINT - A UGUST 27, 2026 periments on gender, race, and age demonstrate consis-tent improvements in demographic fairness while preserv-ing perceptual image quality. By combining timestep-decoupled boundary learning with one-shot guidance in a lightweight framework, SBP offers a practical approach for generating balanced synthetic facial data, supporting the development of fairer downstream learning systems without retraining existing latent diffusion models. 

# References 

[1] Fadi Boutros, Vitomir Struc, Julian Fierrez, and Naser Damer. Synthetic data for face recognition: Current state and future prospects. Image and Vision Computing , 135:104688, 2023. [2] Haibo Qiu, Baosheng Yu, Dihong Gong, Zhifeng Li, Wei Liu, and Dacheng Tao. Synface: Face recog-nition with synthetic data. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international conference on computer vi-sion , pages 10880–10890, 2021. [3] Paweł Borsukiewicz, Fadi Boutros, Iyiola EOlatunji, Charles Beumier, Wendkûuni C Oué-draogo, Jacques Klein, and Tegawendé F Bissyandé. Beyond real faces: synthetic datasets can achieve reliable recognition performance without privacy compromise. npj Artificial Intelligence , 2026. [4] Gwangbin Bae, Martin de La Gorce, Tadas Baltrušaitis, Charlie Hewitt, Dong Chen, Julien Valentin, Roberto Cipolla, and Jingjing Shen. Digiface-1m: 1 million digital face images for face recognition. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF win-ter conference on applications of computer vision ,pages 3526–3535, 2023. [5] Fadi Boutros, Marco Huber, Patrick Siebke, Tim Rieber, and Naser Damer. Sface: Privacy-friendly and accurate face recognition using synthetic data. In IEEE International Joint Conference on Biomet-rics , pages 1–11, 2022. [6] Hatef Otroshi Shahreza, Christophe Ecabert, An-jith George, Alexander Unnervik, Sébastien Marcel, Nicolò Di Domenico, Guido Borghi, Davide Mal-toni, Fadi Boutros, et al. Sdfr: Synthetic data for face recognition competition. In IEEE 18th inter-national conference on automatic face and gesture recognition , pages 1–9, 2024. [7] Ian Goodfellow, Jean Pouget-Abadie, Mehdi Mirza, Bing Xu, David Warde-Farley, Sherjil Ozair, Aaron Courville, and Yoshua Bengio. Generative adversar-ial nets. Advances in neural information processing systems , 27, 2014. [8] Tero Karras, Samuli Laine, and Timo Aila. A style-based generator architecture for generative adversar-ial networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF con-ference on computer vision and pattern recognition ,pages 4401–4410, 2019. [9] Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, and Björn Ommer. Text-guided synthesis of artistic images with retrieval-augmented diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.13038 , 2022. [10] Minchul Kim, Feng Liu, Anil Jain, and Xiaoming Liu. Dcface: Synthetic face generation with dual condition diffusion model. In Proceedings of the ieee/cvf conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pages 12715–12725, 2023. [11] Fadi Boutros, Jonas Henry Grebe, Arjan Kuijper, and Naser Damer. Idiff-face: Synthetic-based face recognition through fizzy identity-conditioned diffu-sion model. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF In-ternational Conference on Computer Vision , pages 19650–19661, 2023. [12] Marco Huber, Anh Thi Luu, Fadi Boutros, Arjan Kuijper, and Naser Damer. Bias and diversity in synthetic-based face recognition. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Winter Conference on Applications of Computer Vision , pages 6215–6226, 2024. [13] Harrison Rosenberg, Shimaa Ahmed, Guruprasad Ramesh, Kassem Fawaz, and Ramya Korlakai Vinayak. Limitations of face image generation. In 

Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial In-telligence , volume 38, pages 14838–14846, 2024. [14] Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Björn Ommer. High-resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Confer-ence on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , pages 10684–10695, June 2022. [15] Malsha V Perera and Vishal M Patel. Analyzing bias in diffusion-based face generation models. In 2023 IEEE International Joint Conference on Biometrics (IJCB) , pages 1–10. IEEE, 2023. [16] Pietro Melzi, Christian Rathgeb, Ruben Tolosana, Ruben Vera-Rodriguez, Aythami Morales, Dominik Lawatsch, Florian Domin, and Maxim Schaubert. Synthetic data for the mitigation of demographic bi-ases in face recognition. In 2023 IEEE International Joint Conference on Biometrics , pages 1–9, 2023. [17] Pavel Korshunov, Ketan Kotwal, Christophe Ecabert, Vidit Amir Mohammadi, and Sébastien Marcel. Investigation of accuracy and bias in face recognition trained with synthetic data. In IEEE International Joint Conference on Biometrics , pages 1–10, 2025. [18] Pietro Melzi, Christian Rathgeb, Ruben Tolosana, Ruben Vera-Rodriguez, Dominik Lawatsch, Florian Domin, and Maxim Schaubert. Gandiffface: Con-trollable generation of synthetic datasets for face recognition with realistic variations. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Com-puter Vision , pages 3086–3095, 2023. [19] Andrea Atzori, Pietro Cosseddu, Gianni Fenu, and Mirko Marras. The impact of balancing real and syn-13 A PREPRINT - A UGUST 27, 2026 thetic data on accuracy and fairness in face recogni-tion. In European Conference on Computer Vision ,pages 284–302. Springer, 2024. [20] Pietro Melzi, Ruben Tolosana, Ruben Vera-Rodriguez, Minchul Kim, Christian Rathgeb, Xiaoming Liu, Ivan DeAndres-Tame, Aythami Morales, Julian Fierrez, Javier Ortega-Garcia, et al. Frcsyn-ongoing: Benchmarking and comprehensive evaluation of real and synthetic data to improve face recognition systems. Information Fusion , 107:1–48, 2024. [21] Ivan DeAndres-Tame, Ruben Tolosana, Pietro Melzi, Ruben Vera-Rodriguez, Minchul Kim, Chris-tian Rathgeb, Xiaoming Liu, Luis F Gomez, Aythami Morales, Julian Fierrez, et al. Sec-ond frcsyn-ongoing: Winning solutions and post-challenge analysis to improve face recognition with synthetic data. Information Fusion , 120:103099, 2025. [22] Sepehr Dehdashtian, Ruozhen He, Yi Li, Guha Bal-akrishnan, Nuno Vasconcelos, Vicente Ordonez, and Vishnu Naresh Boddeti. Fairness and bias mitiga-tion in computer vision: A survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.02464 , 2024. [23] Roberto Leyva, Victor Sanchez, Gregory Epiphan-iou, and Carsten Maple. Demographic bias effects on face image synthesis. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pat-tern Recognition , pages 3818–3826, 2024. [24] Nouar AlDahoul, Talal Rahwan, and Yasir Zaki. Ai-generated faces influence gender stereotypes and racial homogenization. Scientific reports ,15(1):14449, 2025. [25] Cristian Muñoz, Sara Zannone, Umar Mohammed, and Adriano Koshiyama. Uncovering bias in face generation models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.11562 , 2023. [26] Hao Liang, Pietro Perona, and Guha Balakrish-nan. Benchmarking algorithmic bias in face recog-nition: An experimental approach using synthetic faces and human evaluation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision , pages 4977–4987, 2023. [27] Yeongje Park, Junho Baek, Seunghyun Kim, Seung-Min Jeong, Hyunsoo Seo, and Eui Chul Lee. Study on the generation and comparative analysis of ethni-cally diverse faces for developing a multiracial face recognition model. Electronics , 13(18):3627, 2024. [28] Basudha Pal, Arunkumar Kannan, Ram Prabhakar Kathirvel, Alice J O’Toole, and Rama Chellappa. Gaussian harmony: Attaining fairness in diffusion-based face generation models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.14976 , 2023. [29] Michael Yeung, Toya Teramoto, Songtao Wu, Tat-suo Fujiwara, Kenji Suzuki, and Tamaki Ko-jima. Variface: Fair and diverse synthetic dataset generation for face recognition. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.06235 , 2024. [30] Allen Chang, Matthew C Fontaine, Serena Booth, Maja J Matari´ c, and Stefanos Nikolaidis. Quality-diversity generative sampling for learning with syn-thetic data. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , volume 38, pages 19805– 19812, 2024. [31] Shuhan Tan, Yujun Shen, and Bolei Zhou. Improv-ing the fairness of deep generative models without retraining. arXiv preprint arXiv:2012.04842 , 2020. [32] Parsa Rahimi, Christophe Ecabert, and Sébastien Marce. Toward responsible face datasets: model-ing the distribution of a disentangled latent space for sampling face images from demographic groups. In 

2023 IEEE International Joint Conference on Bio-metrics (IJCB) , pages 1–11. IEEE, 2023. [33] Anubhav Jain, Rishit Dholakia, Nasir Memon, and Julian Togelius. Zero-shot demographically unbi-ased image generation from an existing biased style-gan. IEEE Transactions on Biometrics, Behavior, and Identity Science , 6(4):498–514, 2024. [34] Massimiliano Ciranni, Vito Paolo Pastore, Roberto Di Via, Enzo Tartaglione, Francesca Odone, and Vit-torio Murino. Diffusing debias: Synthetic bias am-plification for model debiasing. Advances in Neu-ral Information Processing Systems , 38:116778– 116805, 2026. [35] Tao Yang, Yuwang Wang, Yan Lu, and Nanning Zheng. Disdiff: Unsupervised disentanglement of diffusion probabilistic models. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 36, 2024. [36] Zeyu Lu, Chengyue Wu, Xinyuan Chen, Yaohui Wang, Lei Bai, Yu Qiao, and Xihui Liu. Hierarchi-cal diffusion autoencoders and disentangled image manipulation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Win-ter Conference on Applications of Computer Vision ,pages 5374–5383, 2024. [37] Rishubh Parihar, Abhijnya Bhat, Abhipsa Basu, Saswat Mallick, Jogendra Nath Kundu, and R Venkatesh Babu. Balancing act: distribution-guided debiasing in diffusion models. In Pro-ceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pages 6668–6678, 2024. [38] Malsha V Perera and Vishal M Patel. Unbiased-diff: Analyzing and mitigating biases in diffusion model-based face image generation. IEEE Transactions on Biometrics, Behavior, and Identity Science , 2025. [39] Abhishek Sinha, Jiaming Song, Chenlin Meng, and Stefano Ermon. D2c: Diffusion-decoding models for few-shot conditional generation. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 34:12533– 12548, 2021. 14 A PREPRINT - A UGUST 27, 2026 [40] Konpat Preechakul, Nattanat Chatthee, Suttisak Wizadwongsa, and Supasorn Suwajanakorn. Dif-fusion autoencoders: Toward a meaningful and decodable representation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pat-tern recognition , pages 10619–10629, 2022. [41] Zijian Zhang, Zhou Zhao, and Zhijie Lin. Unsuper-vised representation learning from pre-trained diffu-sion probabilistic models. Advances in neural infor-mation processing systems , 35:22117–22130, 2022. [42] Mingi Kwon, Jaeseok Jeong, and Youngjung Uh. Diffusion models already have a semantic latent space. In 11th International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2023 , pages 1–10, 2023. [43] Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learning transferable visual mod-els from natural language supervision. In Interna-tional conference on machine learning , pages 8748– 8763. PMLR, 2021. [44] Florinel-Alin Croitoru, Vlad Hondru, Radu Tudor Ionescu, and Mubarak Shah. Diffusion models in vi-sion: A survey. IEEE transactions on pattern anal-ysis and machine intelligence , 45(9):10850–10869, 2023. [45] Qinwei Lin, Xiaopeng Sun, Yu Gao, Yujie Zhong, Zheng Zhao, Dengjie Li, and Haoqian Wang. Tasr: Timestep-aware diffusion model for image super-resolution. In Proceedings of the 33rd ACM Inter-national Conference on Multimedia , pages 10034– 10043, 2025. [46] Yueming Pan, Ruoyu Feng, Qi Dai, Yuqi Wang, Wenfeng Lin, Mingyu Guo, Chong Luo, and Nan-ning Zheng. Semantics lead the way: Harmonizing semantic and texture modeling with asynchronous latent diffusion. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recog-nition , pages 43664–43674, 2026. [47] E Zhixuan Zeng, Yuhao Chen, and Alexander Wong. Scalex: Scalable concept and latent exploration for diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Winter Conference on Applications of Computer Vi-sion , pages 3617–3627, 2026. [48] Tero Karras, Timo Aila, Samuli Laine, and Jaakko Lehtinen. Progressive growing of gans for improved quality, stability, and variation. In International Conference on Learning Representations , pages 1– 10, 2018. [49] Kimmo Karkkainen and Jungseock Joo. Fairface: Face attribute dataset for balanced race, gender, and age for bias measurement and mitigation. In Pro-ceedings of the IEEE/CVF Winter Conference on Applications of Computer Vision , pages 1548–1558, 2021. [50] Martin Heusel, Hubert Ramsauer, Thomas Un-terthiner, Bernhard Nessler, and Sepp Hochreiter. Gans trained by a two time-scale update rule con-verge to a local nash equilibrium. Advances in neu-ral information processing systems , 30, 2017. [51] Kristy Choi, Aditya Grover, Trisha Singh, Rui Shu, and Stefano Ermon. Fair generative modeling via weak supervision. In International Conference on Machine Learning , pages 1887–1898. PMLR, 2020. [52] Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. Denois-ing diffusion probabilistic models. Advances in neu-ral information processing systems , 33:6840–6851, 2020. [53] Prafulla Dhariwal and Alexander Nichol. Diffusion models beat gans on image synthesis. Advances in neural information processing systems , 34:8780– 8794, 2021. [54] Alexander Quinn Nichol and Prafulla Dhariwal. Improved denoising diffusion probabilistic models. In International Conference on Machine Learning ,pages 8162–8171. PMLR, 2021. [55] Olaf Ronneberger, Philipp Fischer, and Thomas Brox. U-net: Convolutional networks for biomedi-cal image segmentation. In Medical Image Comput-ing and Computer-Assisted Intervention , pages 234– 241. Springer, 2015. [56] Jooyoung Choi, Jungbeom Lee, Chaehun Shin, Sungwon Kim, Hyunwoo Kim, and Sungroh Yoon. Perception prioritized training of diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 11472–11481, 2022. 15 A PREPRINT - A UGUST 27, 2026 

# A Latent Diffusion Model 

Denoising diffusion models (DMs) [52, 53, 54] generate images through a forward diffusion process that progres-sively corrupts data with Gaussian noise and a reverse diffusion process that iteratively removes that noise to recover the data distribution. Latent Diffusion Models (LDMs) [14] perform this process in a learned latent space, substantially reducing computational cost while preserving semantic information. 

Forward Diffusion: Given a data sample x0 ∼ q(x), the forward diffusion process is defined as a Markov chain that gradually adds Gaussian noise over T timesteps ac-cording to 

q(xt|xt−1) = N



xt; p1 − βtxt−1, β tI



(3) where βt denotes the noise schedule. 

Reverse Diffusion: Starting from Gaussian noise xT ∼N (0 , I), the reverse process learns to approximate the posterior q(xt−1|xt) using a U-Net [55]. The reverse tran-sition is parameterized as 

pθ (xt−1|xt) = N (xt−1; μθ (xt, t ), Σθ (xt, t )) (4) 

Training Objective: The diffusion model is trained by predicting the injected Gaussian noise using the simplified objective 

LDM = Ex,ϵ,t 

h

∥ϵ − ϵθ (xt, t )∥22

i

(5) LDM extends this formulation by performing diffusion in a compressed latent space. An encoder E maps an image to its latent representation z, diffusion operates on z, and a decoder D reconstructs the final image. The correspond-ing objective is 

LLDM = EE(x),ϵ,t 

h

∥ϵ − ϵθ (zt, t )∥22

i

(6) 

# B Intuition for Timestep-Specific Semantic Roles 

We provide an information-theoretic intuition for why se-mantic boundary estimation and semantic manipulation are naturally suited at different diffusion timesteps. The discussion is intended as a conceptual explanation that complements the empirical findings presented in the main text. Let X denote a generated image, Y a demographic at-tribute of interest ( e.g. , gender, race, or age), and Zt rep-resent the latent variable at diffusion timestep t. The for-ward diffusion process induces a Markov chain: 

Z0 → Z1 → · · · → ZT ,

where each transition corresponds to a noisy channel. Through inequality in data processing, 

I(Zt; X) ≤ I(Zt−1; X), I(Zt; Y) ≤ I(Zt−1; Y).

In reverse diffusion, denoising does not symmetrically restore all information. Instead, it preferentially recon-structs information necessary for perceptual fidelity, such as texture and fine detail, which may not align with demo-graphic semantics. Although late-stage latent representations retain substan-tial semantic information, not all such information is available to be manipulated in a controlled manner. To distinguish semantic information from usable semantic in-formation, we consider the mutual information between a demographic attribute Y and a linear projection of the la-tent representation: 

Ilin (Zt; Y) = I(b⊤ 

> t

Zt; Y),

where bt denotes the optimal linear classifier at timestep 

t. Although it is possible that during the late stages of the diffusion process, the value of I(Zt; Y) is still high, non-linear entanglement with perceptual detail causes a de-creased value of Ilin (Zt; Y), restraining the suitability of direct intervention. This is the reason why a high linear separability does not always mean that there can be a high level of manipulability. From this perspective, we consider timestep selection to be trade-off between two competing quantities: maxi-mizing semantic accessibility, represented by Ilin (Zt; Y),while minimizing interference with perceptual structure. This trade-off can be expressed as: 

t⋆ = arg max  

> t

[Ilin (Zt; Y) − λI per (Zt; X)] ,

where Iper denotes information associated with perceptual detail and λ controls the balance between semantic ac-cessibility and perceptual preservation. Since these ob-jectives are generally not optimized at the same timestep, estimating semantic boundaries and applying semantic guidance need not occur simultaneously. The proposed timestep-decoupled strategy is based on the hypothesis that coarse semantic structure is preserved along the diffusion trajectory. Rather than assuming that semantic directions remain constant across timesteps, it exploits the observation that diffusion progressively re-fines image details while maintaining global structure. As a result, semantic boundaries learned from late-stage la-tent representations can still provide meaningful guidance when transferred to earlier timesteps, where latent modifi-cations propagate more effectively through the subsequent denoising process. We do not argue the global linearity of demographic at-tributes or provide a perfect semantic disentanglement. 16 A PREPRINT - A UGUST 27, 2026 increasing 

Figure 7: The top row depicts image manipulation with the latent representations when t = 0 , that is, at the stage of well formed facial semantics. Attribute changes mainly affect fine-grained features around the lips and eyes, like glossy lips or eyes with kajal. The bottom row shows the manipulation at t = T in which semantic separability is less, but transformations yield visually consistent results through coarser structural changes. Instead, it provides an intuitive explanation for why se-mantic information is most discriminative at one stage of the diffusion process yet most amenable to interven-tion at another, thereby motivating the proposed timestep-decoupled semantic guidance framework. 

# C Timestep-Dependent Semantic Structure in LDMs 

We evaluate linear separability at the two extreme phases by learning the decision boundary in the respective latent space through training the SBP model. 

Semantic Boundary Estimation at Late Denoising Stages: 

At t = 0 , the latent codes, denoted by z0, encode well-formed semantics of facial images. We build a dataset by pairing these latent codes with attribute labels y predicted from the corresponding generated images. A linear classi-fier trained on such data provides highly accurate decision boundaries on demographic features. Despite the strong separability, manipulating z0 along the normal vector for the gender attribute results in limited global changes because this stage focuses on refining complex details. Modifications at this stage mainly affect fine-grained regions such as the lips and eyes, as illustrated in the top row of Fig. 7. This behavior reflects the role of late-stage denoising, which focuses on refining complex and interdependent visual details, making it difficult to shift demographic attributes once a well-formed facial structure has already taken shape. 

Early-Stage Latent Intervention: 

Table 10: Impact of Sample Size on Gender Bias in Gen-erated Samples. no. of samples FD ↓ FID ↓

2,000 0.001 34.13 5,000 0.001 32.49 10,000 0.001 31.54 In contrast, latent representations at t = T lack explicit semantic structure, leading to lower SBP accuracy. How-ever, perturbations at this stage yield perceptually coher-ent transformations, as early denoising steps predomi-nantly influence coarse facial geometry [56]. As shown in the bottom row of Fig. 7, traversing semantic direc-tions at this timestep produces more noticeable attribute changes. However, since the semantic separation in the latent space is not well-defined at this stage, the generated images may fail to maintain a balanced attribute distribu-tion for a given demographic. This suggests that while early-stage manipulation facilitates significant transfor-mations, it does not preserve the structured separability required for controlled attribute generations. In order to effectively integrate these complementary properties, we adopt a timestep-decoupled strategy which decomposes the two mechanisms of acquiring semantic boundaries, on the one hand, and the use of semantic in-tervention, on the other. Our strategy assumes that coarse semantic alignment is preserved across diffusion timesteps, so that the direc-tional biases that were introduced during the initializing step can affect the denoising in successive timesteps. This assumption is supported by the observation that denois-ing trajectories maintain global semantic structure while progressively refining perceptual detail. 

# D Ablation Study 

D.1 The Impact of Sample Size Generation on Bias 

Since demographic fairness is estimated from generated samples, it is important to verify that the measured bias is not an artifact of the evaluation sample size. We there-fore evaluated gender bias using 2,000, 5,000, and 10,000 generated images. As shown in Tab. 10, the measured fairness disparity remains largely unchanged across dif-ferent sample sizes, indicating that the evaluation is sta-ble. Based on this observation, we use 10,000 generated samples in all our experiments, consistent with Balancing Act [37]. 

D.2 Qualitative Analysis of Semantic Guidance 

Figure 8 illustrates the effect of traversing the learned gen-der semantic boundary. Adding the latent vector scaled by 

(δ) progressively transforms male faces into female faces, 17 A PREPRINT - A UGUST 27, 2026 whereas subtracting the same latent vector produces the opposite transition. The smooth progression demonstrates that the learned boundary captures a meaningful semantic direction in the latent space and enables controllable de-mographic manipulation through a single inference-time guidance step. 

# E Qualitative Results 

We present additional qualitative results demonstrating the effectiveness of the proposed SBP. We compare un-conditional samples generated by the original Latent Dif-fusion Model with those obtained using SBP across dif-ferent demographic attributes, highlighting changes in de-mographic representation while assessing the preservation of perceptual image quality. Figures are best viewed in color at 2 ×–4 × zoom. Fig. 9 illustrates the gender bias inherent in uncondi-tional sampling from a Latent Diffusion Model trained on CelebA-HQ, where generated faces are dominated by female subjects. In contrast, applying the proposed Se-mantic Boundary Predictor substantially rebalances the demographic distribution by increasing the representation of under-represented groups, while preserving the percep-tual quality of the generated faces as observed in Fig. 10. Fig. 11 illustrates the racial bias inherent in uncondi-tional sampling from a Latent Diffusion Model trained on CelebA-HQ, where generated faces are dominated by white subjects and under-represent other racial groups. In contrast, applying the proposed Semantic Boundary Pre-dictor substantially rebalances the demographic distribu-tion by increasing the representation of under-represented groups, while preserving the perceptual quality of the gen-erated faces as observed in Fig. 12. 18 A PREPRINT - A UGUST 27, 2026 increasing  decreasing 

Figure 8: Qualitative visualization of gender guidance. The guidance strength δ controls movement along the learned semantic boundary. Increasing δ progressively changes male faces to female faces (left), whereas decreasing δ pro-duces the reverse transition (right), while preserving image quality. 

Figure 9: Samples from the LDM [14] model trained on CelebA-HQ, demonstrating the model’s tendency to produce disproportionately female faces (66%) shown above the yellow line and male faces (34%) below, amplifying the gender bias found in the original data. 

Figure 10: Samples generated with our approach effectively address gender bias by producing an equal distribution of faces: approximately 51% female above the yellow line and 49% male below. Additionally, the generated faces exhibit higher perceptual quality, as reflected by the FID score. 19 A PREPRINT - A UGUST 27, 2026 

Figure 11: Samples from the LDM [14] model trained on CelebA-HQ, highlighting the model’s inherent bias towards generating White faces (91%), bounded by yellow line, disproportionately. Black faces (4%) bounded by the blue line, Asian faces (3%) bounded by the green line, and Indian faces (2%) bounded by the red line are underrepresented, reflecting the racial bias present in the original dataset. 

Figure 12: Our LDM + SBP approach mitigates racial bias by upsampling underrepresented groups. The generated samples demonstrate a more balanced distribution: White faces (58%) bounded by the yellow line, Black faces (16%) bounded by the blue line, Asian faces (20%) bounded by the green line, and Indian faces (6%) bounded by the red line. Despite the upsampling, the generated faces maintain high perceptual quality. 20